

CHAPTER VI.  
1. And I heard One speak:  
2. In the seventh of the first was He born, while the  Holy and the Just awaited him with patience.  
3. But after him, in the second, great wickedness did  arise, and fraud did spring forth.  
4. Afterwards, in the third, a Man of the Tree of  Purity, is made manifest: the Branch thereof shall bloom  for ever.  
5. Next, in the fourth, visions of the All-Powerful  shall be seen: the order of generation after generation.  6. Then, in the fifth, the House of Glory and of Might  shall be raised for ever and ever.  
7. In the sixth, there shall be darkness, and in it shall  a Man ascend.  
8. In the seventh, the Righteous shall receive a sword  to execute judgment upon the evil.  
9. In the eighth, shall be the Pure, chosen from the  Tree of Everlasting Beauty.  
She wears the helmet of Venus Cabira. In the second She holds  the Winged Hermes of Heaven, with his roll, or Apocalyptic  Volume, in his hand. Behind her is the Ancile and the Mirror  of the Universe; supported by the Universe itself.  

10. In the ninth, the virginity of the Righteous shall  be revealed to the whole world.  
11. In the seventh of the tenth, an everlasting judg ment shall be executed: heaven shall spring forth in the  midst of the angels.  
12. The Stars of Shesti Matri shall be revealed.* And  a long interval shall pass, and gleam fitfully.  
13. The former heaven shall wane away; a new heaven  shall appear; all the Powers of the Most High shall  shine with seven-fold splendour, lustrous as serpents of  fire.  
14. The House of the King shall be built up for ever.  
15. The Voice ceased.  
16. And I was lost in wonder: the darkness of  mystery on my soul and spirit. And I could not speak.  
Rise, arise, O King of the earth:  
Gird thy spirit with the eagle;  
Soar into the Divine Presence:  
Think not, as mortals think.  
I rose in clouds of golden splendour,  
In flame-mists; in a trance;  
I saw the Chair of Rainbows.  
I saw the splendid gleaming Seraphs.  
Happy, oh! how happy are they,  
Who see these Palaces of Glory;  
Waving, rolling in an eddy of flame;  
With the splendid foam of fire.  
* That is the Child of Six Mothers, of the Nereus or Naros. By  the Buddhists he is called Sosi-Osh, which may be translated either  the Ocean-Saviour or the Fire-Saviour—each alluding to the  Mother, the Holy Spirit. Sosiosh means also the Six, or Naronic  number of the Holy Spirit—that is, Her Son, the Messenger. See  Part III., Primitive Roots, xxi., xxv.  

The Luminous One gives Light  
To all these splendid spheres:  
HU-MAYA-LUC:—  
I fell upon my face in fear.  
And when a thousand years passed,  
He graved upon my thigh:—  
Like a thunder-cloud the Raven passed:  
But his beak dropped blood.  

The First Psalm

Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon His Name:  Make known His deeds among the people;  
Sing unto Him: sing psalms unto Him;  
Talk ye of all His wondrous works.  
Glory ye in His holy Name;  
Let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.  Seek the Lord and His Strength:  
Seek ye His face continually.  
Remember His marvellous works that He hath done;  His wonders and the judgments of His mouth.  He is the Lord our Gඈൽ:  
His judgments are in all the earth.  
Be ye mindful always of His covenant.  
The word which He commanded to a thousand genera tions,  
Saying: Touch not mine Anointed Ones,  
And do my Prophets no harm.  
And when they went from nation to nation,  And from one kingdom to another people,  
He suffered no man to do them wrong,  
Yea, He reproved kings for their sakes.  
Sing unto the Lord, all the earth,  
  

Shew forth from day to day His salvation.  
Declare His Glory among the nations,  
His marvellous work amid all peoples,  
For great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised,  He also is to be feared above all gods.  
Glory and honour are in His presence;  
Strength and gladness are in His place;  
Give unto the Lord, ye kindreds of the people,  Give unto the Lord glory and strength.  
Give unto the Lord the glory due unto His Name,  Worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness.  Once ye were as Spirits before Him;  
Gleaming in the beauty of the sun;  
But now a fallen race,  
Ye sigh after the Golden Seats (4).  
Tremble thou earth;  
The world also, and all that be in it;  
Let the Heavens be glad; let the earth rejoice;  Let all men say, The Lord reigneth;  
Let the sea roar and the fulness thereof;  
Let the fields rejoice and all that is therein.  
Then shall the trees of the wood  
Sing out and shout at the presence of the Lord;  Because He cometh to judge the earth,  
And to give splendour to the Sons of Truth.  O! give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good,  For His mercy endureth for ever.*  
* This Hymn appears in the so-called Psalms of Daoud, cv.,  and in 1 Chron., xvi., 22. I have alluded to it in Part I., 421.  



CHAPTER VII.  
1. The Word revealed unto Enoch: a blessing to the  pure, who shall exist in the days of tribulation; but to the  wicked and ungodly it shall be a stumbling-block. I, Enoch,  was with God; I made answer and spake with Him, while  mine eyes were veiled, yet opened; and while I saw Holy  Visions in the Heavens. These did the Divine Ones  shew: the Lion-Gods.* 

* See Part III., General Index, Lion-Symbol; also 315, 348,  360. See Montfaucon for gem prefixed to this chapter. Chifflet  gives the second, which is the Lion of the Naros, with the Islâm symbol of the conjunction of the Sun and Moon. This Lion is seen  among the Egyptian and Nemroud reliques in the British Museum.  * Kircher says that Annius, in his Commentary on the Apocry phal Berosus, has asserted that in the Volume of Enoch was con tained the prophecy concerning two total destructions of the earth,  which should come to pass, one by water, the other by fire.  
 
From them did I learn all things;  
By them was I filled with understanding;  
I beheld the things which are not now,  
But which shall come to pass in future days:  In generations that are yet to be;  
When the Son of Heaven shall shine forth.  
By them I spake, and did converse with those  Who shall go forth in glory from their habitation,  The Holy and the Mighty,  
The Rulers of the sphere of man.  
In after days they shall sit upon ZION,  
And call their hosts around them.  
They shall be made manifest in lion-strength,  In the majesty of the power of heaven.  
All shall be awed;  
The Children of Darkness shall be terrified;  Fear and trembling shall overcome them;  
They shall be scattered to the ends of the earth.  The lofty mountains shall be troubled;  
And the hills shall be depressed with shame;  They shall melt like honeycombs in Fire;  
The earth of man shall be deluged,*  
The sons of flesh that are thereon shall die,  
And judgment shall be pronounced aloud,  
Yea, even the righteous also shall be on trial;  They shall be weighed in the balances of GOD.  

But to those in fine shall Paradise be opened;  They shall belong to God, and shall be happy in His  light;  
And the splendours of the Beautiful One of Heaven  Shall enfold them round within its circle.  
Behold He comes with thousands of the Saints,  To execute judgment upon the wicked;  
For their crimes shall the sinful suffer;  
And the carnal shall be covered with confusion.  The boundaries of the Universe shall flash lightnings;  The voice of thunders pealing shall be heard;  And bolt on bolt redoubled amid darkness,  
Shall testify the presence of the Holy One.  


CHAPTER VIII.  
All who are in the heavens know the order of the  heavens;†  
 * The above medal is in Beger: it represents the Holy Spirit  borne by the Lion, or God of the Universe. In her right hand is  the Rod or Sceptre of Power; in the left, the Kosmos.  
† This is a mystic shadowing forth of the Naros, in words that  would be intelligible only to those who were themselves aware of  that Sacred Cycle, while to an ordinary reader it would be sealed.  

The stars wander not from their orbits;  
They rise and set at the moments that are marked out;  They disobey not the commands of Him who ruleth.  The high Intelligences look down upon the earth,  And see the things that are done therein;  
They mark the advancing and retreating tide of events,  From the beginning unto the end of the end.  And every Manifestation of the Supreme Being*  Is invariable in his period of appearance;  
As the summer followeth the winter;  
As the cloud and dew refresh the wilderness.  When the trees wither and the leaves fall off,  And the beautiful seems an image of decay;  Yet they know that all shall be in time renewed,  And that the young blossoms shall bud forth.  And when the days of summer come,  
And thou seekest for a shade from the burning heats,  And thou canst not walk upon the parched earth,  Nor upon the rocks because of the glowing beam,  Then the trees put forth their leaves;  
Their green branches produce fruit and shadow;  And the sweet and shady bowers of delightfulness  Succeed to the dry boughs of winter.  
He who liveth for ever doeth these things;  
They are His work, as the rings revolve;  
They are subservient to GOD, and they are immutable  also;  
For as He has ruled, even so do they come.  
As the rivers flow into the seas from out the seas,  So flow the years into the cycles of the years;  
* The Messianic Messenger, called the Manifestation, or Pha nerosis, that is, the Phani Spirit of Love.  

As the seas re-flow into the rivers from the rivers,  So do the cycles blend into the new-commencing years (5). 

 
CHAPTER IX.  
1. Hearken unto me, O Men; hear ye, in what manner  ye have sinned, and how ye have departed from the  straight paths which the Man of God* did show.  In the morning of the earth there was beauty,  In the golden morning of the Ancients;  
When the race of mortals newly born  
Bloomed like trees in summer.  
2. But after sons† had multiplied on the earth, and  their daughters did appear beautiful to the eye, then did  the Children of Heaven‡ look upon them, and they  became enamoured of those fair women.  
3. Like horses did they neigh,  
* * * * *  
4. And they said unto each other, Go to, let us take  unto ourselves wives from those;§ are not we the chosen  children? and shall we not do as seemeth good unto our  hearts?  
5. Then did they debate whether they should abjure  the sacred command; but they resolved to do so, and to  contract marriages with the daughters of those who  renounced God. And their leader, Sam-Iaza, said unto them, May it not be that some of you will repent? and  abandoning your Chief perfidiously, shall it not come to  pass that I alone shall suffer death?  
* Chadâm, or Adi-Buddha.  
† Those who had not followed the Laws of Adam were so  called.  
‡ The followers of Adam were so called.  
§ The Sacred College, or Seven Pagodas, had forbidden all  intermarriage with the vicious, an ordinance imitated by other  eastern nations (6).  

6. But they answered, saying, We swear, and bind  ourselves as one with joint execration that we will not  change from this our purpose, but will do the thing that  we have sworn to do.  
7. And they made oath all together, and bound them selves as one by mutual execrations; and they descended,  to the number of two hundred, upon Ardath, which is  near Mount Ar.  
And the women whom they took brought forth giants,  Mighty men and terrible;  
And these giants begat the Naphelim,*  
And from the Naphelim the Eliudi sprang.  
Vast were their numbers;  
And they taught themselves and their wives also,  Poisons, and incantations, and magic arts,  
And the things and thoughts of Satwanas.  
And Azael made swords and breastplates,  
And melted metals of the earth,  
And fabricated for women gold and silver,  
To bear ornaments like harlots,  
And to polish stones,  
And to give them false splendour,  
And to use colours as dyes,  
And to violate the Laws of God.  
And perverting all the ways of right,  
Wickedness stalked over the earth;  
* Clouds, Phantoms, Ghosts, as contradistinguished from real  Essences. For every evil thing is unreal, having no permanence.  

And they fed hatreds in their hearts,  
And did evil with the roots of herbs.  
8. And of those who polluted themselves, Yakûn  misled the sons of the priests, and, causing them to  descend, led them wandering among the sons and  daughters of the infidel. And he whose surname  was Kesabela gave evil counsel to the sons of the  priests, and led them to corrupt their minds and  bodies by intermarriage with the generation of the  wicked.  
9. And he whose surname was Gader-Eli was  a maker of death instruments; by his hand were  these things given unto the sons of earth from thence  for ever.  
10. And he whose surname was Penemue discovered  unto the children sweets and bitters; he revealed hidden  mysteries, and exposed writings that ought not to be  exposed.  
11. And he whose surname was Kasyadi disclosed  appearances of Gods and Spirits; the Epiphany of the  Divine from the Womb, and of the Pure who was  removed from the bite of the Dragon, and the Manifes 
tation in the light of splendours, of the Faithful One,  the Child of Tebet.* He revealed the sacred number  Kebel,† which the Most High, who dwells in majesty,  made manifest unto his own Holy Ones, and whose name  also is Beka.‡  
 * A further explication of the mysteries of the Apocalypse  which was given by this apostate priest. Tebet is the mystic  Teba, the Naros or 600.  
† This word Cheb-El is explained Part III. xiii. It is the  basis of Kabbala.  
‡ This is an anagram of Keba, the occult name of the Tree of  Version 20180823


12. He divulged that ever Holy Name, which ought  not to be made known to any, breaking through his oath  of power, for powerful and strong was that oath. This  is the Sacred Akao of the Almighty, whereby the  Heavens were suspended before ever the earths were  formed; the Akao that ought not to be revealed.  
13. This is the Holy Name, whereby the earths were  founded on the floods; while the agitated waters rushed  wildly out of their dark and secret beds: whereby also  the seas were formed, and the foundations of the seas  were laid; whereby the rocks were raised against its  anger: the rocks that are unchanged for ages.  
14. This is the Akao that makes strong the Abyss, so  that it shall remain immoveable for ever; by this the  Sun and Moon complete their march, swerving not from  their appointed course.  
15. By this Name the stars revolve; and when their  names are called, they come and go; and the winds are  ruled, and the thunders also, and hail and lightnings and  the seasons.  


CHAPTER X.  
1. And all these, Chiefs among the Watchers, practised  dread iniquities; they polluted themselves with strange women; they made a mock of holy ordinances. They  destroyed birds and harmless creatures; they bowed  them to the images of beast and fish; they ate flesh  and drank blood until the very earth did groan and  sob.  

Knowledge. Postel. Hist. Orient. 206. But Kubè was a name of  Kube-le, or the Holy Spirit Goddess, receptaculum totius naturæ,  after whom is the Arabic black stone or Kaba. The meaning of  the passage therefore is that he revealed secrets connected with  the Ineffable Virgin-Mother, which none but the highest of the  Initiated should know. Akao is one of the divine names of the  Spirit-Sun. Note that Naos, the Greek word for Temple, is  mystic; the N and S indicate Naros, of which the Central Light  is AO.  

2. Impiety was spread over the nations, and harlotry  prevailed in all places; and Amazarach practised witch craft; and Arimerz solved magic questions.  
3. And they worshipped false gods, Nidra, Levata,  Isarta, Patiki; and they did magic in the name of Abdi,  and Og, and Nura, and Adsarta.  
4. And they corrupted all their ways; and observed  the spheres for unlawful uses; and men and animals  cried out to God, and their voices reached the  Thrones.  
5. Then the Holy Spirits, looking from Heaven, beheld  blood over the earth and the iniquity wrought thereon,  and how the spirits of the souls cried out.  
6. The great Archangels of God, Michael, Uriel,  Raphael, Gabriel, looked and saw evil in all places, and  that wickedness had corrupted all. And the Spirits said,  It is the voice of their weeping. The earth is sad, even  to the Gates of God; and now to Thee, O Holy One of  Heaven, the souls of men do cry.  
7. Saying, shrieking: O thou Holy One, justice, justice  from the Most High God.  
8. Then these Spirits said unto their Lord: Lord of  lords, God of gods, the throne of thy glory is for ever;  and for ever and ever is thy name sanctified. Blessed be  thy Throne, thou King of kings!  
9. Thou hast made all: Thou possessest power over all: all things are open before Thee; neither can there  be aught hidden from thine eye.  
10. Thou seest what these do, practising all corruption.  They have joined themselves to sin and shame. Black  are their sorceries. They unto whom thy might of power  was given have polluted themselves with the daughters  of men; they have gone in unto them, and done iniquity,  devising crimes from dawn till dark.  
11. And their wives—they have brought forth Giants,*  so that earth is red with abominations; and thy children  they cry out before Thee, complaining at the Gates of  Heaven; yea, the very souls of the spirits of the dead  do cry;† their lamentation cometh out of the grave.  
12. And the voice of their weeping rises; the echo of  their sadness from below; they cannot shield them selves from the ungodly; nor from sinners make their  escape.  
13. Thou who knowest all things knowest these also  and their fruits; yet Thou hast not spoken to thy Holy  Ones, neither hast Thou declared thy will.  
