
CHAPTER XI.  
1. And Michael said unto Raphael : Bind SamIaza hand and foot; cast him headlong into darkness;  cover up his face.  
2. Restore the earth which he has corrupted; announce life—even a resurrection: all the sons of men  shall not perish: the slaves of soft beds shall be de stroyed. Every oppressor shall die from the earth; the  children of the Watchers, the earth tyrants; but the good  are as trees that bloom for ever, beside their fountains or  by running streams.*   
* In fierceness and power. These were fed on the marrow of  lions, bears, and tigers, and were brutal and sanguinary to the  greatest degree.  
† The writer in Genesis imitates this. The voice of thy brother’s  blood crieth unto me from the ground. iv. 11.  

3. Thus shall it come to pass that the evil shall not  see the days of holiness, the days of beauty; when the  pure shall have begotten thousands, and their sabbaths  shall be gardens of peace.  
4. In those days the face of the earth shall be sown  with seeds of righteousness; it shall be filled with trees  of blessing; every Tree of Paradise shall grow therein.  In it shall vines be planted; every vine shall give forth  abundantly; for one measure of seed a thousand; for one  measure of olives ten presses of oil. (7)  
5. From all injustice it shall be purified; from all  oppression, from all impiety; all manner of pollution  and unrighteousness shall perish from the sphere of  earth.  
6. Then shall the children of men be pure, and all  nations shall adore God alone; He will rain down bless ings from heaven. He will cause them to descend upon  the earth. And upon all the labours of man shall the benediction of Adnai flow; peace and justice shall  assume the sceptre; and reign like kings from Heaven. 

* This and the following passages must have been before Hesiod,  when in his Theogony, he speaks of Zeus having sent the Titans  beneath the broad-wayed earth and bound them in irksome bonds.  There under murky darkness the Titan gods lie hidden in a dark  dreary place near the extremities of the vast earth. They may  not go forth for a brazen chain binds them, and a wall goes round  them on both sides; there the sons of obscure night hold their  habitations, &c., &c., 716.  

  
CHAPTER XII.  
Before all these things I, Enoch, did exist,  
But concealed and secret in the deeps; (8)  
No man knows where I was;  
Neither can the sons of mortals know.  
But I was mingled high with the Holy Ones,  And blessing the Great Lord and Father,  
In a far-off place where darkness dwells not;  Nor any shadow is beheld.  
There a Voice came unto me,  
A Voice Supreme and Holy:  
It awakened me up,  
That with a tongue of flesh I might proclaim.  The Eagle Voice raised me, saying:  
Go Enoch, kinsman of the Sun,*  
Say unto the Watchers who have fallen away,  Who have deserted their pure calling;  
Who have polluted themselves on soft beds,  Abandoning their silent sanctuaries;  
That in exile they shall feel no peace,  
Because they did corrupt themselves with lusts;  They shall have no joy in offspring;  
They shall wail over the destruction they have caused;  They shall weep for the days of innocence,  
* The Hindus call it Archi-Bandu, which has the same  meaning. The mythos of Jesus preaching to the spirits in prison  is founded on this chapter of Enoch.

When truth and mercy were in their hearts.  

We rode upon the Whirlwind’s wing—  Over the dark-red storms;  
We heard the clash of many tempests;  We heard the groans of many thousands.  Lightnings from the thunder-clouds  
Surcharged with deep black smoke;  
Like bright-red horses  
Drawing chariots of iron.  
And in my hand a Sword,  
Like a waving meteor:  
And the heaven seemed ablaze with light,  As I wielded the mighty blade.  
And a cry of desolate mourning,  
And the sighs of many sorrowing ones;  But a Voice of Power said:  
Even so—this judgment is just.  
Their swords were bathed in blood:  
Their arrows dripped with fire:  
And the pale phantoms of the fallen  Passed us in their gloomy clouds.  
And passing on into the places of the Watchers,  I said unto Iaza: O thou fallen!  
A sentence is gone forth against thee;  Behold! thou shalt have peace no more.  He by whom we live,  
He who is All in himself;  
The Invisible, the One,  
God hath sent me to you.  
Thy sin shall bind thee in brass;  
 
Neither shall relief come upon thy limbs;  
Nor supplication win pity;  
For great is thy wickedness.  
1. And I passed onwards, and saw others; they trem bled, pale in terror; and they besought me to intercede  with God, that they might obtain pardon.  
2. Then did I make a record of their supplication, and  of the sufferings which I saw, and of the mercy which  they sought, that they might have peace.  
3. And wending onwards I passed Waters of Vasta tion, of Dan-Ba-Don unto the west of Ar; and reading  there the record of their punishments, behold, I was  transfused.  
4. And lo, a Dream like a Cloud, and Visions in the  flame of Gඈൽ; and I lay and saw a wondrous sight re vealed before the fallen of the Most High.  
5. And when I woke, I went into the place, the De sert of Waters of Vastation: the name thereof is Oubel seyäel, and there I saw them with their faces veiled.  
6. And I related the Vision, and the Dream, and  spake in these words: but their faces were cowled in  darkness.  
7. O fallen ones! who are under judgment; the prayer  of your suffering is unheeded: The Voice of Gඈൽ hath  spoken it; ye have abandoned Him, and are abandoned  of Him.  
8. Weep, and supplicate in silence, but murmur not  against the Decree. Condemn yourselves, not the Divine  Law, which exiles the impure from purity.  
Then I saw, as it were, a Shadowy Cloud,  
Whose sides could no eye penetrate:  

Methought I was involved in its depths,  And from these depths I could not look upward.  I beheld also a Flame of Fire,  
And glittering Mountains whirled around.  They were agitated terribly from side to side;  And out of their breasts Voices came.  Then did I inquire of one of the Spirits,  Saying: What is this flashing thing?  
It is not in Heaven but a Sphere of Fire;  And in it is the voice of lamentation.  He said, Into that place fall blasphemers:  The Spirits of those who meditate and work evil;  Who pervert the Oracles of God, 
Which He reveals by his Apostles.  
O Pillar of Fire,  
Thou who leadest my soul onward:  
To resist the arm of death;  
To be as still and strong as the rock.  
Let me look upon thy face, O Splendour!  Let me hear thy many-voices,  
Soft and powerful as the sea-waves  
When they dash upon some lonely shore.  I follow Thee amidst mists and clouds,  And the heavenly lights of the Star of Morning;*  And when the night gathers in darkness,  Still amid the groves I follow thee, O Flame.  Dusky gloom rushes from the mountains,  The stars are faintly visible:  
Yet still, O Pillar of pure Fire,  
I follow Thee through flying clouds.  
* The Holy Spirit.  

Art thou not the Sole, Supreme God?  
In whom are all secrets wrapped:  
Round Thee clusters the Rainbow:  
But at thy feet I see the lions of battle.  
Thou readest all my secret thoughts;  
My soul is a sun-beam before Thee;  
Great Father! Ancient Mystery;  
How shall I give thee homage?  
I rose, I rushed from mountain to mountain;  Yea, even into the seas I plunged,  
But the Pillar of Fire glittered ever,  
Yet I could not touch it with my hand.  

The second Psalm

Reverence be unto thee, O Lord of Worlds!  Reverence be unto thee, O Eternal One!  
Reverence be unto thee, O God of Justice!  
The emblem of Mercy to those who serve Thee.  Who art the Dispeller of all pain,  
The King of all things:  
The Guardian of the Great Universe;  
The possessor of all things.  
Thou art Lord of the All,  
The proper form of all existences and appearances;  Thou bestowest salvation;  
Be propitious, O Most High God.  
Acshava! Acshava! Acshava!  
Let us adore thee in groves and forests:  
Let us kneel to thee on high places,  
Under the open heavens and the stars.  
O Eternal! O thou Life!  
Thou who art the most beautiful and wise;  

The Supreme Intelligence of Wisdom;  
The source of the Just and Holy:  
The First Principle:  
Thou art not Fire;  
Thou art not Air, nor Water, nor any element,  But the Spirit-Essence of the Universe.  
In love, in gratitude, in veneration;  
May we all kneel before Thee,  
Thanking the Almighty Bestower  
Of goodness boundless as the Infinite.  

CHAPTER XIII.  
1. Then I looked and turned myself to another part,  where I beheld a deep Valley burning with fire, and in  this Valley I saw monarchs, pontiffs, mighty men, bound  in strong iron; in iron fetters without weight.  
2. Then spake I unto their Angel; Who are these  in fetters, and why are they bound? and he answered,  They are the sons of Azaz-eel; they are children of  Hell, and they are fast in the rivets of condemnation.  They have cast themselves into this place so that they  may reap the dread reward of their crimes; for that  they became evil ministers of evil.  
3. O ye kings! O ye pontiffs! and ye mighty men!  who hold high places, would that ye could behold these  things! and that ye could see the Mighty One on His  Throne of Glory!  
4. They moved in punishment and darkness, in woe,  in weeping, in remorse, in net-works of brass and  rivets of iron; the days of their life were past, but the days of their judgment are without number.  They cried aloud to the Eagle, but he heard them not;  to the Serpent; to the Leviathan of the Waters; to  the Lion-gods of seven-fold splendour. And to the  Holy Light from which is imaged all the light that  glitters in the sun. They cried also unto all the  Splendours, but they cried and were not heard.  
5. And the receptacles of the Waters which are above  the skies were opened out, and the Fountains of  Waters which are under the stars put forth their tor rents, and the roar of seventy times seven Thunders was  heard booming over that dark and sullen ocean, so that  my very soul melted into the drip of ice-hills.  

Blessed be thy name, O God,  
Who ridest on the terrible whirlwind;  
Who did’st give a shore to the sea;  
Who did’st say unto the mountains: Thus far.  I hear Thee in the mountain torrents,  
And in the cry of tempests,  
When the forest bends like a reed;  
When thy hand puts forth its terror.  
I know Thou art a terrible Essence;  
A night of gloom—a sea of darkness;  
As lightning whirling amid fearful peals—  
Let the children of air bow down and weep.  Why should the evil-hearted hope  
That thou wilt lift them to the Gardens?  
Why should the slime-brood feed their thoughts  That they too shall ascend among the virgin-bright?  
In this place saw I an Angel of God,  
Version 20180823
212 THE BOOK OF GOD. 
His name was Rasi-el;  
He reclined beside a shining stream,  
But when he saw me he came near.  
He shewed me a Book bright as fire,  
In whose leaves I read Mysteries;  
And he placed it in my hand saying,  
These are Institutes of Heaven.  
I looked upon its silver white pages  
With marks and signs like sapphire;  
And viewed with wonder and awe  
The multiform images of the Concealed;  
Over its surface the stars seemed moving;  
Eddying flames whirled;  
I took it into my hand;  
It was as if I held the Sun.  
Like myrrh and frankincense it was;  
Every page sparkled with light:  
This also did the First receive,*  
* The first, or Adi Buddha, is seen in the above gem from  Beger; he symbolizes the First and the Twelfth Messenger, as  mentioned, ante 7. S. C. means Salvator Chadama and Salvator  Cwenila; the great Mexican Buddha.  

When he descended from day to darkness.  
A Voice cried out; it cried aloud;  
Hu-d-ali, Hu-d-ali,
It was a Voice of Flame;  
Like lightning flashed above the heavens.  
Then from the opposite quarter I heard,  
Ked-Ali, Ked-Ali;  
My soul kindled into fire;  
Shew me that Sacred Sanctuary.  
A flash; a cloud of beams; a glory;  
A whirlwind of light and grandeur;  
A burst of sweetest music;  
A chorus of ten thousand harps—  
She shone in all her beauty;  
A Star of Morning; a full-orbed Moon  
In the brilliant ring of full-orbed splendours—  I looked—I was transfused into a sea.  
Then out of the Ocean rose  
The Daughter of Light and Fire  
Moving in harp-music;  
The waves were gardens of fragrance.  
As the Sun bursts out of a cloud,  
And sheds its glory over the waters;  
So from her morning-eyes  
The beauty of love flashed.  
O Spirit of the Seven Rays,  
Bearer of the Mystic Torch,  
Queen of the Choir of Stars,  
Bless me with thy mystic light.  

My son, the glories of the earth are shadows,  Avoid them, for they are evil also;  
But after the grandeur of the heavenly places  Let thy heart aspire perpetually.  
God hath clothed them with robes and diadems;  He hath filled them with the beauty of light:  I tell thee, for I have seen them with my eyes,  In visions of immortality they have been shewn;  The Golden-Handed One of Heaven raised me;  He bore me aloft into Paradise,  
Even unto the Ensuphic Sphere,  
The Central Star of the Starry Universe.  This is the Sphere of the Infinite,  
The first, the greatest, the most celestial;  Where is the Presence and the Power of God,  And the Spirit of God abides in Glory.  The Ten Splendours, or Spheres of Being,  Stood forth before me in one wondrous glance;  I saw innumerable living pictures;  
The breathing images of the Divine in Heaven.  I saw the pure and lovely representatives  Of the all-beautiful Essence of God;  
His whole heaven was revealed as in a picture,  Resplendent with harmony and light;  
The mystery of the Triadic Powers,  
Life, Intellect, and Spirit,  
Gleamed forth in the Divine Fiery Essence of God,  And my heart melted away in silence.  
I saw also the Everlasting Cycles of the Stars;  And how they roll in flame perpetual;  
And the Spirit of God diffusing life  
Like sweet ambrosia from a cup.  

And I passed onward to a River of Fire  
Which emptied itself into a great Ocean,  
And many large torrents did I then behold;  
Torrents of Death, and Torrents of Destruction:  And Vapour and Night, and Shadows and Silences,  And all the Mystery of the Deeps.  
I went to where those born of flesh descend;  I beheld the Mountains of an everlasting winter;  Places from which the ice-waters roll  
Through many dreadful Cataracts.  
Here shall they be bound who made men profane,  Leading them to wrong by wrongful counsel,  So that they offered sacrifice to satans,  
And mocked the worship of The One.  
But they and their’s shall be judged together  On the day when all wickedness shall suffer;  The sheep shall follow the wolf-like shepherd  Into pastures that conduct to death.  
Here were beasts of monstrous form,  
Creatures of a wild and strange appearance,  And birds various in their shapes,  
And in their faces and discordant cries.  
And afar off, in certain Dark Valleys,  
I saw sinners who had denied God;  
They were expelling and hurling one the other  Into Gulfs of lower darkness.  
The Lord of Spirits punished them not;  
He is the Universal Love:  
Evil in all places, and at all times,  
Becomes its own avenger.  


CHAPTER XIV.  
Three orders of life are there in the Universe: Celestial, Spiritual, and Material life; but the first are tenants of  the Heavens, in brightness and dominion next to God. But  spirits are pure and devoid of flesh; they are of innume rable ranks and degrees; according to their beauty is  their place, and according to their perfectness is their  beauty. But all material life is impure; its stages  and degrees are without number, according to the temper  of the animating principle, and to the form in which it  desires development. Spirits that grow impure by evil  thinking are incapable of living in the æther of Heaven;  they fall down headlong into space as a stone falls through  the air; and, sinking through immense distances into  Chaos, they eagerly desire some tangible hold to save  themselves from further degradation and from the agony  of their everlasting lapse. Then do they desire shapes  in harmony with their nature, and build unto themselves  bodies, moved thereunto by an everlasting instinct which  operates within by Universal Law. Thus the races of  men form themselves; having been pre-existent fallen  spirits who enter the flesh subtly and unseen, and in  the womb weave unto themselves bodies. They use the  materials that are at hand, fabricating organs for them selves by instinct, and in the appointed hour are born in  the shape which they have formed for themselves. For  man giveth not life to man, but the means only of developing life, and every man now living was the sculptor of  his own body and its organs. And this one maketh him self comely, and this one formeth himself to be a lover  of learning; and this one fabricates organs that degrade him, and this one is imperfect because he is unskilful.  Men differ in no wise from other living creatures save  only in the nature of their spirits; to some they are  inferior, but to others superior; but the same principle  of life animates all. And all life is developed in the same  mode by the instinct of spirit weaving unto itself a shape;  as the spider forms a web which no man could make; as the snail makes a shell which no finger could imitate. And  all spirits of the sub-celestial spheres are invisible until  they assume manifestations; they are everlasting Essences  and Powers which need a shape to be their medium of  development. The gods who shine beneath the Thrones  require a medium to make their brightness visible, and  each one makes this medium for himself in exact accord ance with his nature. So also is it with all other spirits;  who, that they may be visible and live in their Circles,  must possess a form suited to those Circles, and if they  lose their forms they can no longer live there. As man  when his body faileth can no longer live on earth, but  must go into another place, so is it with every other  spirit-development which transmigrates with the failure  of its form; and these forms each one fabricates for him self in correspondence with the nature of his desires. And  this assumes a pure, and that an impure development, as  it labours to carry out its longings. But if the nature  grows too beautiful for the form, and too elevated for the  sphere in which it lives, it lays aside that form and  quits that sphere, and ascending higher it assumes a  higher form; but if the nature grows too impure for  the form, and becomes too gross for the sphere in  which it lives; it lays aside that form, and quits that  sphere, and dying descends into a lower form. Thus it is with the races of mankind, who are spirits  making themselves visible by media, which media  are their corporeal bodies, to which they are conjoined  by the soul-principle. This soul is the bond or ligament which unites the spirit to the body, and when  this ligament is dissolved away then death ensues and  separation. This body corresponds in all its powers with  the spirit which giveth it life; for the spirit hath fabricated the body for itself in perfect agreement with its  nature. Hence the various powers and energies of man;  his changing passions and inclinations, infused, not by  God at the creating moment, but by the spirits themselves into their organs. For as they develope themselves  in precise conformity with their tempers, aspect, and ten dencies, every energy that is in the brain of man is placed  there by himself alone. Unjust it were in God to give  men various powers; to favour some and to defraud  others; to give a mighty intellect to one; to bestow a  puny understanding on another. God doeth not this  wrong; but every man is as he makes himself; and some  are great and some are base, because their spirits are  great or base. And this, if he makes himself nobler than  a man, lays aside his body and leaves the earth; he  ascends to a superior order of existence and assumes  development therein. But this, if it makes himself beneath a man, then laying aside his body and leaving  earth, he wanders into darkness and lapses lower until  he comes within the Cyclic Law.  


CHAPTER XV.  
Then did mine eyes behold another deep Valley:  Wide was its entrance:  
Vast and long were the approaches:  
Dark and silent was each vast recess.  
All who dwelt on land, or on the sea,  
Brought offerings thither:  
Yet was not that deep Valley filled:  
Ever it yawned for more.  
They whose hands produced iniquity,  
Who laboured to bring forth evil,  
Had there the fruit of their labours:  
The sinful fed upon their own crimes.  
They were corpses before the Lord of Life,  
They perished from the face of nature;  
I beheld them minister to their own punishment,  Choosing out satans from among themselves.  And I looked in terror on that Valley  
Where there was great perturbation:  
And the cry of a sad multitude;  
Where the waters were troubled.  
And Rivers of Flame flowed through it,  
And these were mingled with the Waters:  
And in these I saw the satans plunge  
In the madness of an infuriated guilt.  
And I saw many Spirits,  
And their voices rose to Heaven accusingly:  Then I besought him that he would make known,  Whose were these Spirits?  
He answered, saying:—These are they  
Who have been trampled under the feet of men:  They accuse their evil doers  
Until their seed shall perish from the earth.  
Six Angels mighty as the solar sphere  
Preside and watch over this Land of Shadow,  And these are the names of the Angels who watch  In the vigil whereunto the Lord hath sent them.  Uriel presides over the place itself,  
Governing its terror and tempests,  
And Raphael impels the wandering spirits,  And Raguel punishes those among them who rebel,  And Michael rewards those among them who do good,  And Sarakiel leads them into other spheres,  And Gabriel receives them at Ikaisat;  
These are the Holy Angels of Splendour  
Whom Gඈൽ hath set above the Land of Shadows,  Then did I make a circuit of this most dread place  Wherein nothing seemed complete or uniform;  But all was Chaos, Gloom, and Cloud,  
The Image of a mighty ruin.  
Neither was the workmanship of heaven in this place,  Nor the beauty of a well-poised sphere;  
But all was vacuous desolation;  
And all was shadow, silence, and dismay.  
And looking upon Seven Fires,  
Bound in it like great and rolling storms;  
I cried aloud, For what crime have they been burned?  And why have they been removed into this place?  And one of the Holy Angels  
Answered and said, Wherefore dost thou ask?  These are they who have defied God,  
And here they do abide until their day be done.*  
And after these things my Spirit was concealed;  
* These Seven Fires are Worlds filled with spirits that have  lapsed from light.  
 
It lay hidden for a while in Heaven  
With the Children of the Holy Spirit of Light,  And they walked as if on burning fires.  
Their robes, their garments were of snow-splendour;  Their countenances were crystal;  
And before their faces I saw two Rivers of Fire  Glittering like the bright jacinth.  
Then did I fall down before the Lord of Spirits;  But one of the Splendours lifted me up;  
He bare me into a secret place;  
There did the Spirit of Enoch lie concealed.  
O mortal, who art immortal;  
Thou who in clay partakest of the Eternal:  
Is thy soul of force to pierce the Dark?  
Canst thou read the Hidden?  
Those things which I have seen on high;  
Those things which I have unveiled—  
Are to the slaves of earth a riddle:—  
Dark as the Voices of the Stars.  
If thou givest not thyself heart and soul.  
Yea, and thine everlasting spirit unto their contem plation,  
Labouring by day; meditating in the night:  
Rejecting earth, and aiming after the spiritual:—  If thou doest not these things earnestly,  
Praying also unto the Supreme for aid,  
Know thou this, from me, the Messenger,  
Never shalt thou read their meaning.  
Thou shalt think, and think, and still strive:  
But the dawn of light shall not reach thee:  
Thou shalt be as one who, while a mortal,  
 
Labours hard to soar into the sun.  
But if, abandoning all earthly things,  Thou givest up thy whole nature to the search,  Thy soul itself shall be light;  
Thy spirit shall partake of the Wisdom of God.  