The Book of Enoch.  

CHAPTER I.  
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Gracious,  slow to punish, and of great compassion and holiness.  This Book is of Enoch the Prophet. May the blessing  of God be with that man who loves him for ever and  ever. Amen.  
1. IRAD, the son of MAHA-GAR, built himself a palace,  with fair gardens, and a Temple also. And he raised it  on a thousand columns, each three hundred cubits high.  The Wild Bull guarded its porches.  
2. And in the centre IRAD raised a golden Image;  the face of a man, the neck of a lion, the body of a bull,  an eagle’s wings. And IRAD gave command throughout  the whole country that all should come and worship the  Image, the likeness of his God.   
3. And the Watchers of the Night came with their  wives and with their children and their slaves also, and  they did homage to the Idol; and they forgot the First.  And multitudes flocked together from East and West;  and the cave dwellers; they who lived on fish and reptiles, and drank blood, and fed on the marrow of lions;  and the serpent eaters, and those who lived on canes and  locusts, and on raw flesh.  
4. And they who slept in trees and on rafts, and  hunted beasts and destroyed birds; and those who lived  on ostriches and dog’s milk, and tortoises, and the flesh  even of men; all gathered themselves unto the King’s  Temple, and bowed before the Image of their sovereign’s  God (1).  
Bless my song, O Sun!  
Thou mighty Star of the Seven Heavens:  
Who swayest the spheres of earth.  
Through the immensity of boundless Space.  O resplendent!  
O universally shining One;  
Who rulest the tracks of Light;  
To whom mortals look with joy.  
O Universal Glory;  
Thou just, thou gracious, thou supreme Father;  May my inspired soul praise thee;  
May the music of my thought sing thy brightness.  Thou art the sovereign Light;  
Whose glorious Image shines ever above me.  To thee, heroes pray;  
Nor do their prayers arise in vain.  
The east is glad with thine arising glory;  
Fair is thy meridian splendour;  
And when thou settest in the shining west,  
Still we look on thee with love and praise.  
5. And it was night; and it came to pass that I,  ENOCH, was alone in the Temple, and I contemplated  the Image. And a tempest arose; thunders and waves  of lightnings, and the moan of winds; and the dome of  the Temple was rent; and the whirl and the rains rushed  in.  
6. And behold! a flash, and it rolled down like a  god; and grappling the Image it smote from head to  foot, and dashed it in fragments; its crown of jewels was  broken; its sceptre was a ruin; it lay as lies a blackened  corpse; it was stricken into small pieces, and the rain  roared, and buffeted its remnants.*  
7. And when I saw the Image dashed to earth, I  said, Is this the god we worship? a god, the slave of  chance and of the elements? He cannot foresee the  storm; he cannot ward away the stroke of ruin; in his  own house he is helpless; he lies at the mercy of the  Messengers of Air.  
8. But I; whither shall I betake myself, and why  should I yield up my soul and spirit to what is not?  Thou, who art in Fire  
Teach me thy Mysteries:  
Fill me with divine inspiration,  
Bathe me in the streams of light.  
* The description here given reminds one of that magnificent  image in which Homer calls thunder the terrific armour of God. By one of the Psalmists  it is called the Voice of God. xxix. 3. Hence a Messenger is  called a Son of Thunder; and the Seven Thunders of the Apocalypse are Seven Voices of God.  

Ancient of Days!  
Clothe me with the serene moon of wisdom:  Illuminate my soul, that deep ocean,  
Till in its darkest depths it feels thy splendour.  I am alone, and ever lonely:  
I feel myself a wandering, helpless unit;  
Death on this side: death on that;  
The cloud of desolation ever present.  
In vain do I uplift me to the Ancient;  
In my prayer have I sought him ever and ever;  But no answer doth he give me.  
Never once hath He spoken  
Visions enter my soul——  
But I seek the Vision of the Supreme;  
When wilt thou give it to me, O Father?  
When shall I see Thee in the Temple?  
Then shall I pass away with full content,  
When I know that thou hast heard me;  
When the sound of the Eternal Harp  
Has bathed my soul in tears.  
Lights and gleams and dreams;  
And words from the starry heaven;  
And visions over the veiled eye;  
And the presence of ethereal essences.  
Fiery lights, flashes of flame;  
A waving sea of stars:  
A magnet-trance,  
An awakening soul and spirit.  
9. And I departed from the place, and passed over the  river. I bowed no longer to the stone (2) upon its banks.  The stars shone through darkness; but I kissed not my  hand to them. I lifted up my spirit to the One.   
I sought counsel and strength from Him.  
Hear, O Heaven, and give ear, O Earth,  
All ye Children of Beauty hear:  
Better is it to be forsaken of all men,  
Than to be made their king by joining in their vices.  To God alone be Glory.  
The night departs: darkness is scattered;  
The morning brings back light:  
Reverence be unto the Supreme:  
Let not none share praise with Him.  
O Gඈൽ, let us give Thee thanks,  
In the night and in the morning,  
Under the stars, and under the sun,  
For all thy benefits to mortals.  
10. And I saw a Virgin more beautiful than the Sun;  she spake, and smiled upon me; and she said, Come, for  so thou art commanded; and she led me to a Wilder ness: no tree was in that solitary place.  
11. And when it was night the Virgin drawing forth a  robe, made of it a tent, and she went in and laid her  down, and beckoned to me: and she was as a Rainbow.  But I heeded not; I lay upon the sand; the stars shone  over me.  
12. Then again she beckoned to me, saying, Thou art  faint with hunger, wilt thou not have food? and I an swered, Yes; and she showed me a lamb straying; and  she said, Arise, kill and eat; but I answered, Nay; I  will rather die of hunger; this lamb belongeth not to  me; her owner hath lost, and peradventure now seeketh  after her, why should I steal? better is it to die: And  the stars shone over me. But over her tent I saw the  Rainbow shine.  

13. And when it was morning she rose, and went her  way: she smiled; I followed. Feeble I was; yet I mur mured not; we wandered over a Wilderness. And  when it was evening, lo! a bottle of water; and the  Virgin said: Take; drink. But I said, Nay; some tra veller has dropped it; peradventure he may come back and  die if he find it not.  
14. And when it was night she drew forth her robe,  and made of it a tent; and she went in and laid her  down; and beckoned to me. But I heeded not; I looked  not on her; I lay upon the sand until the morning blush.  
15. And I saw a fountain of pure water, cold as the  moonlight, and a date tree full of fruit; and I called to the  Virgin within the tent; but she answered me not. The  fading stars alone seemed speaking to me.  
16. And I said, O daughter hast thou no word for me?  and who art thou enwrapped in mystery? Two days  have we journeyed over this desert; and thou hast not  broken once thy fast; yet still thou bloomest like the rose,  and thy brightness is like the moon in her fifteenth day;  and now when God has offered food, lo! thou wilt not  take thereof.  
17. Then the Virgin said to me: ENOCH! I am the  Spirit of thy spirit: I have seen and tried and proved thee;  now do I depart. And she left me, and I was alone;  alone and weary in the Mountains: and the stars spake  to me, and light entered my heart; and I seemed to pass  over the waters of a great sea; and I was in a Dream.  
O Thou Beautiful! come upon the winds.  
Glide over the waters: sink into my soul:  
Let the sun of thy bright face  
Shine in lustre over me.    

What am I? What am I?—  
Sin is like a shroud around me:  
A man among evil men:  
With thoughts of evil: evil in my nature.  
Can I go unto the children of the land,  
And say unto them, Follow me?—  
Her face of sunbeams glittered—  
Even so it is ordained.  



CHAPTER II.  
There was a Veil lifted from above my head;  My spirit saw the Past and the revolutions of the Past;  A City splendid with gold and marble;  
With stately towers, palaces, and temples;  
And I said unto one who guarded the Gates:  
* The Eleusin Medals prefixed to this Chapter are taken from  Beger. They represent the Virgin Mother of the Lions of Jid,  or the Apocalyptic Messengers. In the medal to the right She  holds the Mirror or symbol of the Universe; in that to the left  she holds the Branch. See Part I, 515; II, 152; III, 82, 284;  and the General Index, s. v. Mirror.  

Friend! how long hath stood this noble City?  And he said, This City hath always stood,  Its years are without number, it will stand for ever.  Then rolled a Cloud over me, and I passed onward;  And when a thousand years were gone  I came again that way and sought the City,  But I found no remnant of its mighty splendour.  I saw only a Desert.  
There was no herbage, nor any fountain;  Dry and burned dust and sand.  
I saw a Wanderer, and said unto him,  
O friend! where is that noble City?  
He answered saying, This Wilderness  
Hath stood for ever and will stand for ever;  There is no City, neither hath there been;  But all is Desert as thou seest.  
Then rolled a Cloud over me and I passed onward,  And when a thousand years were gone  I came again that way and sought the Desert;  But the Desert was no more.  
A vast Forest of woodland  
Covered all the plains and mountains,  
And there were men felling trees;  
And there were hunters following game.  One reclined beneath a mighty tree:  
I said to him, My friend, answer thou me,  How long hath this majestic Forest  
Filled the place of the departed Desert!  He said, This Forest hath been here for ever;  Yea, even from the birth of time;  
And unto the end will it flourish greenly;  There is no Desert, nor hath there ever been.  

This is the primeval Forest.  
Then rolled a Cloud over me and I passed onward,  And when a thousand years were gone,  
I came again that way and sought the Forest;  But I saw Tents and smiling plains,  
And shepherds with their flocks and herds,  
And children playing among flowers;  
I said unto one, white with years,  
O venerable father of many!  
How long have these fields produced fruit?  Blooming sweetly for men and cattle?  
He answered, saying, They have produced fruit  From the very first moment of the world.  
I told him of the Forest, but he heeded not.  
He said, There hath been no Forest here:  
These plains have always borne food  
Abundantly for the shepherd tribes.  
Then rolled a Cloud over me and I passed onward,  And when a thousand years were gone  
I came again that way and sought the Tents,  There were no Tents, nor any trace of life;  
But in their place I saw an Ocean  
Rolling with great billows;  
And on the Ocean was a boat,  
And a solitary Man was in the boat.  
I said unto him, Where are the Tents,  
The green fields, and the smiling shepherd tribes?  He said, Thou dreamest; there are no fields,  Nor have there ever been in this Ocean.  
But from the first have these waves rolled  
Over the boundless Deeps beneath;  

They shall roll for ever and ever  
Unchanged and mighty as they now be.*  



CHAPTER III.  
1. Then was my soul enwrapped: my spirit was trans fused in mists and clouds: gleams passed before me. Dim  forms beckoned, and airy voices whispered in mine ear.  I heard, as it were, the sound of waterfalls, and of many  instruments of music, and after these silence, as of a  starry night; a silence that spake.  
Like a tree stricken by lightnings;  
Like a tower blasted by the stroke of heaven;  Like a ship wasted by the waters—  
Even so was my spirit.  
The Ocean stretched afar;  
Like the dim form of Eternity:  
A spreading wilderness of many waters:  
A vast and boundless space.  
Bright and many-coloured were the gleams and flashes  That came like swans over that ocean:  
Or as eagles with fiery wings;  
Or as the flame-pinioned Seraphim.  
Every peak seemed bearded with light;  
Every pine and oak a pillar of fire,  
And angel-voices sang:  
He comes—the Great One comes.  
Summon thou the Sacred Congregation,  
The dwellers by the dark seas;  
 * There is a strange coincidence between this and Ovid. lib.  xv. cited ante Vol. I., 75. Had Ovid read the true Book of  Enoch? or had he learned its teachings in one of the Lodges?  

Let them fly to welcome the king,  
The descendant of the star-clothed. 

 
O Wave! thou Wave of Flame!  
What sayest thou unto my soul!  
The Wave arose; it stood! it spake:  
Stand thou not in my presence!  
Within my mountain cave I fell prostrate;  
My lips touched the crystal stream;  
The mountains rolled in clouds;  
The waters whirled in darkness.  
A light, a flash, a quivering glory  
Wrapped me in an eddy:  
I was borne by the Mountain Eagles  
Into a dark place.  
Hymns of beauty resounded:  
My spirit was enfolded in trance:  
The fire-birds of flashing splendour  
Flitted round—but silence was supreme.  
For three days—for three nights;  
For three courses of the stars;  
For three marches of the rolling storms,  
Rest, and pray in this solitude.  
I know the numbers of the Shining Host,  
Of the mystical Ouein;  
Son of Fire; Voice of Wisdom;  
Know that God is One.  
Adore thou, the Supreme Ruler,  
The Lord of the Sapphire belt;  
The mountains answered:  
Know that God is One.  
And I heard the Waves saying:  

As are the leaves of trees, so are the generations of men;  The City fades, and the Desert grows;  
The Wilderness itself is swept away in time,  And the Forest takes its place,  
And the Plains give way to the Waters,  
And the Waters themselves in turn are dried up;  So are the generations of mortals;  
They live, they die, and are no more.  
And I saw Four Ages;  
The Age of Air, the Age of Water,  
The Age of Fire, the Age of Earth;  
These passed before me.  
Then spake the Serpent with the Lion’s head;*  Behold I do reveal unto thee, Wisdom;  
I have shown thee, Powers of Heaven;  
I have guided thee to the pathway of the gods;  
* This is the Serpent of the Naronic Cycle as he appears in one  of the gems of St. Genevieve, published by Montfaucon. The  solar glory surrounds his head; the Sun and Moon are seen to  conjoin in the Cycle. He is a Leviathan, but with a Lion’s  head.  
 
Destruction is but the prelude to Renewal:  
Death is but the portal to Life;  
Even truth also must be made new.  
Behold, I saw the Heaven in a blaze of purity,  And I saw the earth absorbed into an Abyss:  The rolling sphere inclined;  
The moment of destruction was at hand. (3)  Mountains suspended over mountains;  
Hills sinking upon hills;  
Lofty trees toppled headlong;  
They sank downwards into chasms.  
My voice faltered;  
I cried out and spake:  
Lo! the earth—it is destroyed;  
It hath passed like a falling meteor.  
Then did He raise me up:  
Why dost thou lament, son of my soul?  
I spake as I had seen:  
I revealed the Vision.  
He said, What thou hast witnessed shall come to pass;  Thine is a Vision of the True;  
Destruction is at hand;  
The earth shall sink.  
Yet now arise; pray to the Lord;  
To the Lord of Spirits that he may spare;  
That the race of mortals die not  
When the bolt descends from heaven.  
Lord of all the creatures in the heavens?  
King of kings —God of the world.  
Blessed art thou, O Lord, the King,  
Great and powerful in thy majesty:  

Thy reign, thy kingdom, thy thrones of light,  Endure for ever and ever;  
All the heavens are thy seat;  
And the earth thy footstool throughout the Ages.  For Thou hast made them, and over all thou reignest;  There is no act which is beyond thy power;  With thee is Wisdom without change;  
She abideth ever near thy Throne, and in thy presence.  Thou knowest all things;  
Thou seest and hearest all things;  
There is not anything concealed from Thee;  For thou perceivest clearly:  
The spirits of thy heavens have transgressed,  And on mortal flesh shall thy judgment fall.  When the order of things throughout the Universe  Hath grown old and feeble and decayed,  
Thou speakest; thy Word leaps forth:  
Behold in new beauty they are restored  
As a noble Tree when winter passes  
Puts forth the glory of its strength;  
Even so perpetually renewed  
Is that mighty Palm, the Universe.  
But thou, O Lord and mighty King,  
Grant thou the prayer that I pray  
May followers be given to Thy Word on earth;  May the whole human race not perish,  
That the Sphere of Man may not be lonely;  That an ever-abiding destruction prevail not.  Or if indeed the Sons of Evil perish,  
Let a righteous and upright race come  
Who shall establish their posterity for ever.  O Lord! hide not thy face.  
    
As from a blazing Fire when the wind blows  Sparks and flashes perpetually ascend;  
Even so from the Central Light  
Light perpetually goes forth.  
And he said:  
Son of my Soul look thou on this Book,  
Which heaven has distilled as if in dew,  
And reading that which is written therein,  
Understand thou every part thereof.  
Then did I look upon it;  
And I understood the varied works of man;  And of all the children of flesh upon earth  
Throughout successive generations.  
And I blessed the Lord, the King of Glory,  
The worker of the workmanship of the world,  And I glorified the Lord because of his long endurance,  And of his blessings given to the children.  
I arose; I prayed; I wept;  
I went forth, and looked on high;  
I saw the Sun walking in splendour  
The stars of twilight were scattered.  
Then was I aware of another Voice;  
The Voice of the Silver-Headed:  
The Supremely-Fair of the spheres,  
With the varied rainbow of the Thrones.  
A foam of eddying light around the head;  
A river of flowing fire beneath the feet;  
Out of the midst lightning flashes;  
Darkness, whirlwind, and silences.  
He who would pass into the Celestial Circle,  Who would cross the boundary of fire,  

As a silver arrow shooting through the midst—  As a note of music from the harp.  
Lo! I say to thee, his pure-white essence,  
If it hath one tinge of even a shadow of darkness,  Shall sink and perish in that stream:  
The weight of a hair shall draw it down.  
The King, the slave, the beggar by the way,  
Are equal all upon the river bank.  
God giveth unto every man  
A reward equivalent to his work.  
The sovereign on earth is not a sovereign in heaven:  He who has begged, begs not in the spiritual:  All are on the same level.  
And unto each shall his meed be presented.  
A monarch sought to pass,  
He was hurled into Infinite Space:  
The monarch’s lowliest servant came,  
He passed on wings of light into the Angelic Sphere.  


CHAPTER IV.  
1. This is a record of the revolutions of the Heavenly  Lights, according to their classes, powers, periods, names;  the places of their birth, and their successive months, as  the shining Angel did reveal them.  
2. This shall be their order during ages of ages until a  new cycle shall arise, and this indeed is the first law of  the luminaries; the Sun and Light arrive at the Gates of Heaven, which are in the bright East, and thence they  travel onward to the Gates of Heaven that lie west ward.  
3. There are the Celestial Gates from which the Sun  goes forth, and the Celestial Gates in which the Lion  sets; thence also does the White Hind arise and set  again; and the Star-leaders among the starry host.*  
4. Six Gates are there where the Sun arises, and Six  Gates in the place where he sets, and all respectively are  on an equal level, and there are many apertures for splen dour on the right and on the left.†  
5. First marches forth the solar Lion replete with  luminous fiery flames; the circle of which is as the  Circle of Heaven itself, and where he ascends as in  a chariot, the wind blows. The sun sets in heaven,  and returning by the north, so as to proceed towards the  east, it entereth by that Gate, and thence illuminates the  whole face of heaven, and so for the first month it goeth  out of that Gate, and rolling onward it reaches the fourth  Gate; of these six, which are at the rising of the Sun;  and in this fourth Gate, through which the Sun and Moon  proceed, there are twelve apertures for splendour through  which flame issues.  
6. And when the Sun arises in the heaven it goes forth  through this fourth Gate for thirty days, and by the  fourth Gate that is in the heaven westward, and parallel  with the former it now descends; during that period the day is lengthened from the day, and the night curtailed  from the night for thirty days, and then the day is longer  by two parts than the night; the day is ten parts and  the night is eight.  
* Founded on this passage was the Jewish name for a syna gogue, Shar Hasha, or the Gate of Heaven. The Hindu Ghauts  give their name to our Saxon Gates.  
† These things are metaphorically spoken; the language of the  heavens is not like a mathematical demonstration in Euclid.  
7. The Sun goeth forth through this fourth Gate and  sets in it, and turns to the fifth Gate during thirty  days; after which it goeth out and sets in the fifth Gate;  then the day becomes lengthened by a second portion;  now, indeed, the day is as eleven parts; the night is  shortened, and is only seven parts.  
8. And now the Sun returning eastward enters the  sixth Gate, rising and setting therein one and thirty days.  At that period the day is longer than the night; it is  twelve parts; it is twice the time of night; the night  itself is shortened into six parts; thenceforth the day is  shortened and the night made long.  
9. Again the Sun returns eastward entering the sixth  Gate; there does it rise and set for thirty days; when  that period is completed the day is shortened: it is  eleven parts while the night is seven.  
10. Then the Sun marches from the west from the  sixth Gate, advancing eastward, it arises in the fifth  Gate; there it remaineth throughout thirty days, and  sets again west-ward in the fifth Gate of the west. At  that period the day becomes shorter by two parts; the  night is eight parts: the day is ten parts, the night is  eight parts.  
11. Then the Sun advances out of the fifth Gate, as it  did set in the fifth Gate of the West: and rises in the fourth  Gate for thirty one days, setting in the west because of  its signs; at that period the day and night are equal;  the night is nine parts and the day is nine parts.  
  
12. Then the Sun goes from the Gate as it sets in the  west, and returning eastward goeth onward by the third  Gate, there it remaineth throughout thirty days, setting  in the west at the third Gate. At that period the night is  lengthened from the day, and the day is shortened for  thirty days; the night is equal to ten parts, but the day  itself consists of only eight parts.  
13. The Sun now goes from the third Gate, where it set  in the west; returning eastward it proceeds by the second  Gate of the east; there it passeth throughout thirty  days; setting in the second Gate of the west of heaven.  Then the night is equal to eleven parts; but the day itself  is equal only to seven.  
14. Then the Sun goeth from the second Gate where it  did set; it returns to the east by the first Gate for thirty  one days; it sets in the west in the first Gate; the night  is then twelve parts and the day is six.  
15. Then the Sun, having completed the circuit, re turneth a second time throughout its sphere into the first  Gate; it enters throughout thirty days, and sets in the  west in the opposite part of heaven; at that period  the night is again shortened; it consists but of eleven  parts, while the day is seven; then the Sun enters into  the second Gate of the east, rising and setting in its  circuits for thirty days; then the night is again made  shorter; it becomes ten parts, while the day is eight  parts.  
16. Then the Sun goes from that second Gate and sets  in the west, but rises in the east in the third Gate for  thirty days; then the night becomes again shortened; it  is but nine parts; the day also is nine, and the night and the day are alike equal, and the whole year hath three  hundred and sixty-four days.  
17. Thus the day is daily lengthened and the night  shortened, during the progress of the sun back and for ward, and this is the law of that great and everlasting  Lion which God hath so appointed for ever and ever. And  his names are Ari-Arez, Sur, and Tamuz.*  
These things did he show me,  
That Angel of the Lord of Splendours:—  
The institution of heaven in the Heavens,  
And in the worlds that are under the Heavens;  Twelve Gates that open to the circuits of the sun-chariot;  And from which the rays of the sun are emitted;  From these rays heat proceeds.  
Twelve Gates also I beheld in Heaven,  
Through which the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars,  And all the luminaries of heaven do come forth,  According to their periods of rising and setting.  There too I saw secret meteors,  
And the distribution of the varied winds,  
And the mysteries of dews and clouds;  
The caverns of the hail, the snows,  
The mansions of the clouds,  

* Among the curious monuments of Egypt, says Sheik Schem sedden Mohammed, in his book entitled The Wandering Stars,  we must place the Berbis. At Dendira there is one in which  there is a dome that has as many windows as there are days in the  year: every day the sun makes his entry by one of those win dows, and does not return till the anniversary of that day in the  following year. There are many words, adds de Sacy, whose sig nification I have not been able to determine with precision; many  appear to have been entirely unknown to our lexicographers; of  these is the word Berbis. [It means the Creative Force or  Energy.]  

The wondrous Cloud itself  
Which filled all Space  
Before the Universe gleamed.  
The mechanism of the Moon, and her phases;  Her birth ever renewed  
From darkness into crystal light;  
Her unchangeable procession.  
How she goes before the giant Sun,  
Wandering never from her path;  
Shining as a lamp to mortals  
In obedience to the Supreme Lord  
I mingled in her mysterious orbits;  
The cycles that she completes by day and night;  Her course to the pure, a splendour,  
But to the evil utter darkness.  
Unto these, even the Sun shines not:  
His orb is but vapoury mist:  
How can they who are blind to God  
Perceive the glory of his servant?  
God hath separated Light from Darkness;  
A fiery belt divides them;  
The spirits that delight in each, abide in each,  None can pass that ever-burning zone.  
18. And he said: Knowest thou, O Enoch, who may  this Sun be? and who this whitely-shining Moon? The  Lion glitters, but the White Hind is all love.  
19. From the Sun proceedeth all that is divine: love  and light, and warmth and beauty.  
20. These flow into all places, into all natures, into all  essences, into all starry fountains.  
21. With these are carried along in flame-circles the  leaders of ten thousand classes of stars.  

22. Regarding these, men do greatly err: they know  not their true nature, nor become participants of the  sun-gleam.  
23. Blessed are they who do receive thereof: who  shine and burn and are crowned.  
24. And he said: Hast thou heard of the ways through  which the Splendid Ones go forth? Seek—meditate— retire into the wilderness: in the caverned mountains  seclude thy soul.*  


CHAPTER V.  
Beautiful art thou, O Sun!  
Yet I will not bow to thee in worship;  
And thou, Moon, art fair indeed;  
Yet will not my soul adore thy circle.  
I have seen ye tremble in light,  
As if ye were living Creatures;  
Yet I know that ye are ministers only:  
And that God is your Divine Master.  
He shall be my Sovereign:  
Before His Throne will I bend low:  
I will not worship the Rainbow Spirit  
Who is ever near and with the Lord.  
But thou, O Moon, art her footstool,  
And thou, O Sun, art but her veil.  
She casts thee round her, like a robe—  
Shall I worship a garment?  
In the mystical grove I see an Altar—  
It is the sacred Altar of the Father:  
On this shall I lay my heart,  
* Enoch did so. See Apocalypse , section 13; Part I., 525 \

And unto Him only shall I bow in adoration.  
And I saw a Glory of Light; clouds fine as air; and  in the centre thereof the Sun; and two Rainbows round  the Sun; and yet a third Rainbow in the opposite  quarter. But in the extreme ends of the two Rainbows  the central Sun was so brightly mirrored, that the intensity  of light and golden splendour made three Suns, when  there was but One.  
And lo! a vision of fire-red horses,  
They passed over seas of waters;  
In dew, in rain, in frost, in snow,  
Like meteor-lights they flashed.  
The mountains stayed them not;  
They put forth wings; they flew;  
Thunders in their dark feet;  
And in their eyes stars like fires.  
I heard their names:  
The silver Gates of the Clouds opened wide;  And downward into the glens,  
They passed like rivers of flame.  
He shewed me the Secret of the Lights,  
And the judgment which they carry on their wings,  They lighten for a blessing;  
According to the will of the Lord of Essence.  The secrets of the Thunders were revealed unto me:  When they grind as in a mortar above heaven:  When the night-clouds fly before them,  
And the sound of their wrath is heard.  
Their Voice is for peace and blessing,  
And for judgment also according to the Law:  When the guilty hear and know it,  

They hide themselves in caves and holes.  
Divinely beautiful is the survey of the Heavens,  And of the splendours that revolve therein:  
Beautiful in their majestic order;  
In their varied and majestic course,  
For their beauty and order are derived  
From Him who is the First,  
The One, Supra-Celestial Fire—  
The Ancient of the olden time.  
Afterwards I saw every Secret  
Of the Dark Splendours that are concealed;  
I grasped the sources of those Lightnings;  
Which bless and fertilize while they flash.  
O thrice blessed are ye,  
Ye pure Spirits of the earth,  
For whom a knowledge of those beautiful things  Has been prepared by your Lord and Father.  Ye shall exist in sunlight;  
In the rays of everlasting life,  
Whose beam shall shine for ages  
With a glory that never fails.  
1. Then another Spirit who proceeded with me spake,  and shewed me the first and last Secrets; the Mysteries  of the Heavens above; the mysteries of the earths be neath; and the beginnings of all things, and how the  Spirits of the Heavens are divided; and the Spirits who  rule the winds; and how the winds are numbered by  God; each in proportion to his strength and excel lence.  
2. He shewed me the force of the moon’s light, and  how its growth is regulated; and he disclosed to me the name she bears among the Immortals; the first is Ason Ya; the second Ebla; the third Benasi, and the fourth  Erae. And he narrated to me the divisions of the stars  in order, and their names, and the ranks of each division.  He shewed me how the lightning flashed, and how the  clouds do instantly obey; and the silent pause of the  
thunders; and the energy of the new-awakened bolt.  
3. The thunder and the lightning are one; yet are  they both, two forces; they move not with one spirit,  yet are they still indissolubly joined. For when the  lightning flashes forth, then indeed the thunders sound;  and the guiding Spirits pause and rest, until the space of  the time is passed.  
4. He shewed me how each is restrained as with a  bridle, and is impelled by the force of the spirit, which  sweeps them over the mighty spheres, as an arrow  loosened from the bow.  
5. And I beheld, as if in seven-fold lustre, Holy  Ancients: the Cherubim with uplifted wings of glory;  the Seraphim and the Ophanim of light; the pure and  burning Chasmalim of starry shape; Asarim and Isarim;  myriad and innumerable millions they were; their songs  and music filled the Universe.  
6. Seas of light flowed before me, far into extended  space; oceans with towers and spires and obelisks on  their snow-white shores.  
After this he gave me the signs,  
He made known symbols and secrets  
Of all the hidden wisdom  
In the Book of my Father,*  
* The Book of my Father means the Apocalypse. Section 8.  (See Part I., 521);—They gave to her the two wings of an Eagle to flee into Hermon, where was her place;—and the Naronic Cycle,  where the Sun and Moon conjoin, with Six Stars, are commemo rated in the two Eleusin medals which I copy from Beger. The  Rainbow surrounds the Holy Spirit.  

And in the mystic parables  
Of the All-Powerful Spirit;  
Who is there whose heart softens not  
Whose nature is not troubled at these things?  
Light of the Universe!  
When shall I return me to Thee?  
When shall I go back unto the ancient places,  The paradise-bowers of Primeval Love?  
There the mighty Triad of Beauty  
Shines in white resplendency;  
Armoured in the diamond-light of heaven:  
With bows and arrows of golden beam.  
Around the Fire-Altar  
Rising in the midst of ocean,  
Washed by ten thousand darkling waves,  
They bend, they pray, they sing.  
The Rainbow rises out of the Ocean;   
But the Spirit shines in loveliness,  
The waves leap up with silver on their crests;  She breathes delight and peace through all.  
A hymn arises out of the mystic cells,  
The song of Hu, the Lord of the Universe:  
It impels as if with fiery force  
An effluence through all that live.  
Their natures beat with fire-energy;  
They swell with joy and with a calm wisdom;  And circle round the White Stone of Might,  Whose face is the Mirror of the Spirit.  
O Mighty One, small as the mote,  
O Glorious One, larger than the Universe;  
Our Lord, our God, our Mysterious Sire,  
In Thee alone do we put faith.  
Thou art Life; Thou art Light;  
Thy form is translucent sunshine;  
Lord of Waters! Lord of Worlds!  
The Great, the Ancient, the Infinite.  
And I saw a holy Vision in the Heavens.  
In the two medals above (which I take from Beger), Sacer  Ceres, in the first, holds the Branch or symbol of the Buddha:  

And He said, Who will go?  
And a peal of thunders answered:  
The Universe was wrapped in dazzling flame;  It quivered in the hold of lightnings.  
Hear ye, hear ye, said the Thunders,  
The Branch of the Lord is beautiful;  
He alone knoweth no change,  
But his fruit is an everlasting glory. 