The Book of Enoch.  

CHAPTER I.  
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Gracious,  slow to punish, and of great compassion and holiness.  This Book is of Enoch the Prophet. May the blessing  of God be with that man who loves him for ever and  ever. Amen.  
1. IRAD, the son of MAHA-GAR, built himself a palace,  with fair gardens, and a Temple also. And he raised it  on a thousand columns, each three hundred cubits high.  The Wild Bull guarded its porches.  
2. And in the centre IRAD raised a golden Image;  the face of a man, the neck of a lion, the body of a bull,  an eagle’s wings. And IRAD gave command throughout  the whole country that all should come and worship the  Image, the likeness of his God.   
3. And the Watchers of the Night came with their  wives and with their children and their slaves also, and  they did homage to the Idol; and they forgot the First.  And multitudes flocked together from East and West;  and the cave dwellers; they who lived on fish and reptiles, and drank blood, and fed on the marrow of lions;  and the serpent eaters, and those who lived on canes and  locusts, and on raw flesh.  
4. And they who slept in trees and on rafts, and  hunted beasts and destroyed birds; and those who lived  on ostriches and dog’s milk, and tortoises, and the flesh  even of men; all gathered themselves unto the King’s  Temple, and bowed before the Image of their sovereign’s  God (1).  
Bless my song, O Sun!  
Thou mighty Star of the Seven Heavens:  
Who swayest the spheres of earth.  
Through the immensity of boundless Space.  O resplendent!  
O universally shining One;  
Who rulest the tracks of Light;  
To whom mortals look with joy.  
O Universal Glory;  
Thou just, thou gracious, thou supreme Father;  May my inspired soul praise thee;  
May the music of my thought sing thy brightness.  Thou art the sovereign Light;  
Whose glorious Image shines ever above me.  To thee, heroes pray;  
Nor do their prayers arise in vain.  
The east is glad with thine arising glory;  
Fair is thy meridian splendour;  
And when thou settest in the shining west,  
Still we look on thee with love and praise.  
5. And it was night; and it came to pass that I,  ENOCH, was alone in the Temple, and I contemplated  the Image. And a tempest arose; thunders and waves  of lightnings, and the moan of winds; and the dome of  the Temple was rent; and the whirl and the rains rushed  in.  
6. And behold! a flash, and it rolled down like a  god; and grappling the Image it smote from head to  foot, and dashed it in fragments; its crown of jewels was  broken; its sceptre was a ruin; it lay as lies a blackened  corpse; it was stricken into small pieces, and the rain  roared, and buffeted its remnants.*  
7. And when I saw the Image dashed to earth, I  said, Is this the god we worship? a god, the slave of  chance and of the elements? He cannot foresee the  storm; he cannot ward away the stroke of ruin; in his  own house he is helpless; he lies at the mercy of the  Messengers of Air.  
8. But I; whither shall I betake myself, and why  should I yield up my soul and spirit to what is not?  Thou, who art in Fire  
Teach me thy Mysteries:  
Fill me with divine inspiration,  
Bathe me in the streams of light.  
* The description here given reminds one of that magnificent  image in which Homer calls thunder the terrific armour of God. By one of the Psalmists  it is called the Voice of God. xxix. 3. Hence a Messenger is  called a Son of Thunder; and the Seven Thunders of the Apocalypse are Seven Voices of God.  

Ancient of Days!  
Clothe me with the serene moon of wisdom:  Illuminate my soul, that deep ocean,  
Till in its darkest depths it feels thy splendour.  I am alone, and ever lonely:  
I feel myself a wandering, helpless unit;  
Death on this side: death on that;  
The cloud of desolation ever present.  
In vain do I uplift me to the Ancient;  
In my prayer have I sought him ever and ever;  But no answer doth he give me.  
Never once hath He spoken  
Visions enter my soul——  
But I seek the Vision of the Supreme;  
When wilt thou give it to me, O Father?  
When shall I see Thee in the Temple?  
Then shall I pass away with full content,  
When I know that thou hast heard me;  
When the sound of the Eternal Harp  
Has bathed my soul in tears.  
Lights and gleams and dreams;  
And words from the starry heaven;  
And visions over the veiled eye;  
And the presence of ethereal essences.  
Fiery lights, flashes of flame;  
A waving sea of stars:  
A magnet-trance,  
An awakening soul and spirit.  
9. And I departed from the place, and passed over the  river. I bowed no longer to the stone (2) upon its banks.  The stars shone through darkness; but I kissed not my  hand to them. I lifted up my spirit to the One.   
I sought counsel and strength from Him.  
Hear, O Heaven, and give ear, O Earth,  
All ye Children of Beauty hear:  
Better is it to be forsaken of all men,  
Than to be made their king by joining in their vices.  To God alone be Glory.  
The night departs: darkness is scattered;  
The morning brings back light:  
Reverence be unto the Supreme:  
Let not none share praise with Him.  
O Gඈൽ, let us give Thee thanks,  
In the night and in the morning,  
Under the stars, and under the sun,  
For all thy benefits to mortals.  
10. And I saw a Virgin more beautiful than the Sun;  she spake, and smiled upon me; and she said, Come, for  so thou art commanded; and she led me to a Wilder ness: no tree was in that solitary place.  
11. And when it was night the Virgin drawing forth a  robe, made of it a tent, and she went in and laid her  down, and beckoned to me: and she was as a Rainbow.  But I heeded not; I lay upon the sand; the stars shone  over me.  
12. Then again she beckoned to me, saying, Thou art  faint with hunger, wilt thou not have food? and I an swered, Yes; and she showed me a lamb straying; and  she said, Arise, kill and eat; but I answered, Nay; I  will rather die of hunger; this lamb belongeth not to  me; her owner hath lost, and peradventure now seeketh  after her, why should I steal? better is it to die: And  the stars shone over me. But over her tent I saw the  Rainbow shine.  

13. And when it was morning she rose, and went her  way: she smiled; I followed. Feeble I was; yet I mur mured not; we wandered over a Wilderness. And  when it was evening, lo! a bottle of water; and the  Virgin said: Take; drink. But I said, Nay; some tra veller has dropped it; peradventure he may come back and  die if he find it not.  
14. And when it was night she drew forth her robe,  and made of it a tent; and she went in and laid her  down; and beckoned to me. But I heeded not; I looked  not on her; I lay upon the sand until the morning blush.  
15. And I saw a fountain of pure water, cold as the  moonlight, and a date tree full of fruit; and I called to the  Virgin within the tent; but she answered me not. The  fading stars alone seemed speaking to me.  
16. And I said, O daughter hast thou no word for me?  and who art thou enwrapped in mystery? Two days  have we journeyed over this desert; and thou hast not  broken once thy fast; yet still thou bloomest like the rose,  and thy brightness is like the moon in her fifteenth day;  and now when God has offered food, lo! thou wilt not  take thereof.  
17. Then the Virgin said to me: ENOCH! I am the  Spirit of thy spirit: I have seen and tried and proved thee;  now do I depart. And she left me, and I was alone;  alone and weary in the Mountains: and the stars spake  to me, and light entered my heart; and I seemed to pass  over the waters of a great sea; and I was in a Dream.  
O Thou Beautiful! come upon the winds.  
Glide over the waters: sink into my soul:  
Let the sun of thy bright face  
Shine in lustre over me.    

What am I? What am I?—  
Sin is like a shroud around me:  
A man among evil men:  
With thoughts of evil: evil in my nature.  
Can I go unto the children of the land,  
And say unto them, Follow me?—  
Her face of sunbeams glittered—  
Even so it is ordained.  



CHAPTER II.  
There was a Veil lifted from above my head;  My spirit saw the Past and the revolutions of the Past;  A City splendid with gold and marble;  
With stately towers, palaces, and temples;  
And I said unto one who guarded the Gates:  
* The Eleusin Medals prefixed to this Chapter are taken from  Beger. They represent the Virgin Mother of the Lions of Jid,  or the Apocalyptic Messengers. In the medal to the right She  holds the Mirror or symbol of the Universe; in that to the left  she holds the Branch. See Part I, 515; II, 152; III, 82, 284;  and the General Index, s. v. Mirror.  

Friend! how long hath stood this noble City?  And he said, This City hath always stood,  Its years are without number, it will stand for ever.  Then rolled a Cloud over me, and I passed onward;  And when a thousand years were gone  I came again that way and sought the City,  But I found no remnant of its mighty splendour.  I saw only a Desert.  
There was no herbage, nor any fountain;  Dry and burned dust and sand.  
I saw a Wanderer, and said unto him,  
O friend! where is that noble City?  
He answered saying, This Wilderness  
Hath stood for ever and will stand for ever;  There is no City, neither hath there been;  But all is Desert as thou seest.  
Then rolled a Cloud over me and I passed onward,  And when a thousand years were gone  I came again that way and sought the Desert;  But the Desert was no more.  
A vast Forest of woodland  
Covered all the plains and mountains,  
And there were men felling trees;  
And there were hunters following game.  One reclined beneath a mighty tree:  
I said to him, My friend, answer thou me,  How long hath this majestic Forest  
Filled the place of the departed Desert!  He said, This Forest hath been here for ever;  Yea, even from the birth of time;  
And unto the end will it flourish greenly;  There is no Desert, nor hath there ever been.  

This is the primeval Forest.  
Then rolled a Cloud over me and I passed onward,  And when a thousand years were gone,  
I came again that way and sought the Forest;  But I saw Tents and smiling plains,  
And shepherds with their flocks and herds,  
And children playing among flowers;  
I said unto one, white with years,  
O venerable father of many!  
How long have these fields produced fruit?  Blooming sweetly for men and cattle?  
He answered, saying, They have produced fruit  From the very first moment of the world.  
I told him of the Forest, but he heeded not.  
He said, There hath been no Forest here:  
These plains have always borne food  
Abundantly for the shepherd tribes.  
Then rolled a Cloud over me and I passed onward,  And when a thousand years were gone  
I came again that way and sought the Tents,  There were no Tents, nor any trace of life;  
But in their place I saw an Ocean  
Rolling with great billows;  
And on the Ocean was a boat,  
And a solitary Man was in the boat.  
I said unto him, Where are the Tents,  
The green fields, and the smiling shepherd tribes?  He said, Thou dreamest; there are no fields,  Nor have there ever been in this Ocean.  
But from the first have these waves rolled  
Over the boundless Deeps beneath;  

They shall roll for ever and ever  
Unchanged and mighty as they now be.*  



CHAPTER III.  
1. Then was my soul enwrapped: my spirit was trans fused in mists and clouds: gleams passed before me. Dim  forms beckoned, and airy voices whispered in mine ear.  I heard, as it were, the sound of waterfalls, and of many  instruments of music, and after these silence, as of a  starry night; a silence that spake.  
Like a tree stricken by lightnings;  
Like a tower blasted by the stroke of heaven;  Like a ship wasted by the waters—  
Even so was my spirit.  
The Ocean stretched afar;  
Like the dim form of Eternity:  
A spreading wilderness of many waters:  
A vast and boundless space.  
Bright and many-coloured were the gleams and flashes  That came like swans over that ocean:  
Or as eagles with fiery wings;  
Or as the flame-pinioned Seraphim.  
Every peak seemed bearded with light;  
Every pine and oak a pillar of fire,  
And angel-voices sang:  
He comes—the Great One comes.  
Summon thou the Sacred Congregation,  
The dwellers by the dark seas;  
 * There is a strange coincidence between this and Ovid. lib.  xv. cited ante Vol. I., 75. Had Ovid read the true Book of  Enoch? or had he learned its teachings in one of the Lodges?  

Let them fly to welcome the king,  
The descendant of the star-clothed. 

 
O Wave! thou Wave of Flame!  
What sayest thou unto my soul!  
The Wave arose; it stood! it spake:  
Stand thou not in my presence!  
Within my mountain cave I fell prostrate;  
My lips touched the crystal stream;  
The mountains rolled in clouds;  
The waters whirled in darkness.  
A light, a flash, a quivering glory  
Wrapped me in an eddy:  
I was borne by the Mountain Eagles  
Into a dark place.  
Hymns of beauty resounded:  
My spirit was enfolded in trance:  
The fire-birds of flashing splendour  
Flitted round—but silence was supreme.  
For three days—for three nights;  
For three courses of the stars;  
For three marches of the rolling storms,  
Rest, and pray in this solitude.  
I know the numbers of the Shining Host,  
Of the mystical Ouein;  
Son of Fire; Voice of Wisdom;  
Know that God is One.  
Adore thou, the Supreme Ruler,  
The Lord of the Sapphire belt;  
The mountains answered:  
Know that God is One.  
And I heard the Waves saying:  

As are the leaves of trees, so are the generations of men;  The City fades, and the Desert grows;  
The Wilderness itself is swept away in time,  And the Forest takes its place,  
And the Plains give way to the Waters,  
And the Waters themselves in turn are dried up;  So are the generations of mortals;  
They live, they die, and are no more.  
And I saw Four Ages;  
The Age of Air, the Age of Water,  
The Age of Fire, the Age of Earth;  
These passed before me.  
Then spake the Serpent with the Lion’s head;*  Behold I do reveal unto thee, Wisdom;  
I have shown thee, Powers of Heaven;  
I have guided thee to the pathway of the gods;  
* This is the Serpent of the Naronic Cycle as he appears in one  of the gems of St. Genevieve, published by Montfaucon. The  solar glory surrounds his head; the Sun and Moon are seen to  conjoin in the Cycle. He is a Leviathan, but with a Lion’s  head.  
 
Destruction is but the prelude to Renewal:  
Death is but the portal to Life;  
Even truth also must be made new.  
Behold, I saw the Heaven in a blaze of purity,  And I saw the earth absorbed into an Abyss:  The rolling sphere inclined;  
The moment of destruction was at hand. (3)  Mountains suspended over mountains;  
Hills sinking upon hills;  
Lofty trees toppled headlong;  
They sank downwards into chasms.  
My voice faltered;  
I cried out and spake:  
Lo! the earth—it is destroyed;  
It hath passed like a falling meteor.  
Then did He raise me up:  
Why dost thou lament, son of my soul?  
I spake as I had seen:  
I revealed the Vision.  
He said, What thou hast witnessed shall come to pass;  Thine is a Vision of the True;  
Destruction is at hand;  
The earth shall sink.  
Yet now arise; pray to the Lord;  
To the Lord of Spirits that he may spare;  
That the race of mortals die not  
When the bolt descends from heaven.  
Lord of all the creatures in the heavens?  
King of kings —God of the world.  
Blessed art thou, O Lord, the King,  
Great and powerful in thy majesty:  

Thy reign, thy kingdom, thy thrones of light,  Endure for ever and ever;  
All the heavens are thy seat;  
And the earth thy footstool throughout the Ages.  For Thou hast made them, and over all thou reignest;  There is no act which is beyond thy power;  With thee is Wisdom without change;  
She abideth ever near thy Throne, and in thy presence.  Thou knowest all things;  
Thou seest and hearest all things;  
There is not anything concealed from Thee;  For thou perceivest clearly:  
The spirits of thy heavens have transgressed,  And on mortal flesh shall thy judgment fall.  When the order of things throughout the Universe  Hath grown old and feeble and decayed,  
Thou speakest; thy Word leaps forth:  
Behold in new beauty they are restored  
As a noble Tree when winter passes  
Puts forth the glory of its strength;  
Even so perpetually renewed  
Is that mighty Palm, the Universe.  
But thou, O Lord and mighty King,  
Grant thou the prayer that I pray  
May followers be given to Thy Word on earth;  May the whole human race not perish,  
That the Sphere of Man may not be lonely;  That an ever-abiding destruction prevail not.  Or if indeed the Sons of Evil perish,  
Let a righteous and upright race come  
Who shall establish their posterity for ever.  O Lord! hide not thy face.  
    
As from a blazing Fire when the wind blows  Sparks and flashes perpetually ascend;  
Even so from the Central Light  
Light perpetually goes forth.  
And he said:  
Son of my Soul look thou on this Book,  
Which heaven has distilled as if in dew,  
And reading that which is written therein,  
Understand thou every part thereof.  
Then did I look upon it;  
And I understood the varied works of man;  And of all the children of flesh upon earth  
Throughout successive generations.  
And I blessed the Lord, the King of Glory,  
The worker of the workmanship of the world,  And I glorified the Lord because of his long endurance,  And of his blessings given to the children.  
I arose; I prayed; I wept;  
I went forth, and looked on high;  
I saw the Sun walking in splendour  
The stars of twilight were scattered.  
Then was I aware of another Voice;  
The Voice of the Silver-Headed:  
The Supremely-Fair of the spheres,  
With the varied rainbow of the Thrones.  
A foam of eddying light around the head;  
A river of flowing fire beneath the feet;  
Out of the midst lightning flashes;  
Darkness, whirlwind, and silences.  
He who would pass into the Celestial Circle,  Who would cross the boundary of fire,  

As a silver arrow shooting through the midst—  As a note of music from the harp.  
Lo! I say to thee, his pure-white essence,  
If it hath one tinge of even a shadow of darkness,  Shall sink and perish in that stream:  
The weight of a hair shall draw it down.  
The King, the slave, the beggar by the way,  
Are equal all upon the river bank.  
God giveth unto every man  
A reward equivalent to his work.  
The sovereign on earth is not a sovereign in heaven:  He who has begged, begs not in the spiritual:  All are on the same level.  
And unto each shall his meed be presented.  
A monarch sought to pass,  
He was hurled into Infinite Space:  
The monarch’s lowliest servant came,  
He passed on wings of light into the Angelic Sphere.  


CHAPTER IV.  
1. This is a record of the revolutions of the Heavenly  Lights, according to their classes, powers, periods, names;  the places of their birth, and their successive months, as  the shining Angel did reveal them.  
2. This shall be their order during ages of ages until a  new cycle shall arise, and this indeed is the first law of  the luminaries; the Sun and Light arrive at the Gates of Heaven, which are in the bright East, and thence they  travel onward to the Gates of Heaven that lie west ward.  
3. There are the Celestial Gates from which the Sun  goes forth, and the Celestial Gates in which the Lion  sets; thence also does the White Hind arise and set  again; and the Star-leaders among the starry host.*  
4. Six Gates are there where the Sun arises, and Six  Gates in the place where he sets, and all respectively are  on an equal level, and there are many apertures for splen dour on the right and on the left.†  
5. First marches forth the solar Lion replete with  luminous fiery flames; the circle of which is as the  Circle of Heaven itself, and where he ascends as in  a chariot, the wind blows. The sun sets in heaven,  and returning by the north, so as to proceed towards the  east, it entereth by that Gate, and thence illuminates the  whole face of heaven, and so for the first month it goeth  out of that Gate, and rolling onward it reaches the fourth  Gate; of these six, which are at the rising of the Sun;  and in this fourth Gate, through which the Sun and Moon  proceed, there are twelve apertures for splendour through  which flame issues.  
6. And when the Sun arises in the heaven it goes forth  through this fourth Gate for thirty days, and by the  fourth Gate that is in the heaven westward, and parallel  with the former it now descends; during that period the day is lengthened from the day, and the night curtailed  from the night for thirty days, and then the day is longer  by two parts than the night; the day is ten parts and  the night is eight.  
* Founded on this passage was the Jewish name for a syna gogue, Shar Hasha, or the Gate of Heaven. The Hindu Ghauts  give their name to our Saxon Gates.  
† These things are metaphorically spoken; the language of the  heavens is not like a mathematical demonstration in Euclid.  
7. The Sun goeth forth through this fourth Gate and  sets in it, and turns to the fifth Gate during thirty  days; after which it goeth out and sets in the fifth Gate;  then the day becomes lengthened by a second portion;  now, indeed, the day is as eleven parts; the night is  shortened, and is only seven parts.  
8. And now the Sun returning eastward enters the  sixth Gate, rising and setting therein one and thirty days.  At that period the day is longer than the night; it is  twelve parts; it is twice the time of night; the night  itself is shortened into six parts; thenceforth the day is  shortened and the night made long.  
9. Again the Sun returns eastward entering the sixth  Gate; there does it rise and set for thirty days; when  that period is completed the day is shortened: it is  eleven parts while the night is seven.  
10. Then the Sun marches from the west from the  sixth Gate, advancing eastward, it arises in the fifth  Gate; there it remaineth throughout thirty days, and  sets again west-ward in the fifth Gate of the west. At  that period the day becomes shorter by two parts; the  night is eight parts: the day is ten parts, the night is  eight parts.  
11. Then the Sun advances out of the fifth Gate, as it  did set in the fifth Gate of the West: and rises in the fourth  Gate for thirty one days, setting in the west because of  its signs; at that period the day and night are equal;  the night is nine parts and the day is nine parts.  
  
12. Then the Sun goes from the Gate as it sets in the  west, and returning eastward goeth onward by the third  Gate, there it remaineth throughout thirty days, setting  in the west at the third Gate. At that period the night is  lengthened from the day, and the day is shortened for  thirty days; the night is equal to ten parts, but the day  itself consists of only eight parts.  
13. The Sun now goes from the third Gate, where it set  in the west; returning eastward it proceeds by the second  Gate of the east; there it passeth throughout thirty  days; setting in the second Gate of the west of heaven.  Then the night is equal to eleven parts; but the day itself  is equal only to seven.  
14. Then the Sun goeth from the second Gate where it  did set; it returns to the east by the first Gate for thirty  one days; it sets in the west in the first Gate; the night  is then twelve parts and the day is six.  
15. Then the Sun, having completed the circuit, re turneth a second time throughout its sphere into the first  Gate; it enters throughout thirty days, and sets in the  west in the opposite part of heaven; at that period  the night is again shortened; it consists but of eleven  parts, while the day is seven; then the Sun enters into  the second Gate of the east, rising and setting in its  circuits for thirty days; then the night is again made  shorter; it becomes ten parts, while the day is eight  parts.  
16. Then the Sun goes from that second Gate and sets  in the west, but rises in the east in the third Gate for  thirty days; then the night becomes again shortened; it  is but nine parts; the day also is nine, and the night and the day are alike equal, and the whole year hath three  hundred and sixty-four days.  
17. Thus the day is daily lengthened and the night  shortened, during the progress of the sun back and for ward, and this is the law of that great and everlasting  Lion which God hath so appointed for ever and ever. And  his names are Ari-Arez, Sur, and Tamuz.*  
These things did he show me,  
That Angel of the Lord of Splendours:—  
The institution of heaven in the Heavens,  
And in the worlds that are under the Heavens;  Twelve Gates that open to the circuits of the sun-chariot;  And from which the rays of the sun are emitted;  From these rays heat proceeds.  
Twelve Gates also I beheld in Heaven,  
Through which the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars,  And all the luminaries of heaven do come forth,  According to their periods of rising and setting.  There too I saw secret meteors,  
And the distribution of the varied winds,  
And the mysteries of dews and clouds;  
The caverns of the hail, the snows,  
The mansions of the clouds,  

* Among the curious monuments of Egypt, says Sheik Schem sedden Mohammed, in his book entitled The Wandering Stars,  we must place the Berbis. At Dendira there is one in which  there is a dome that has as many windows as there are days in the  year: every day the sun makes his entry by one of those win dows, and does not return till the anniversary of that day in the  following year. There are many words, adds de Sacy, whose sig nification I have not been able to determine with precision; many  appear to have been entirely unknown to our lexicographers; of  these is the word Berbis. [It means the Creative Force or  Energy.]  

The wondrous Cloud itself  
Which filled all Space  
Before the Universe gleamed.  
The mechanism of the Moon, and her phases;  Her birth ever renewed  
From darkness into crystal light;  
Her unchangeable procession.  
How she goes before the giant Sun,  
Wandering never from her path;  
Shining as a lamp to mortals  
In obedience to the Supreme Lord  
I mingled in her mysterious orbits;  
The cycles that she completes by day and night;  Her course to the pure, a splendour,  
But to the evil utter darkness.  
Unto these, even the Sun shines not:  
His orb is but vapoury mist:  
How can they who are blind to God  
Perceive the glory of his servant?  
God hath separated Light from Darkness;  
A fiery belt divides them;  
The spirits that delight in each, abide in each,  None can pass that ever-burning zone.  
18. And he said: Knowest thou, O Enoch, who may  this Sun be? and who this whitely-shining Moon? The  Lion glitters, but the White Hind is all love.  
19. From the Sun proceedeth all that is divine: love  and light, and warmth and beauty.  
20. These flow into all places, into all natures, into all  essences, into all starry fountains.  
21. With these are carried along in flame-circles the  leaders of ten thousand classes of stars.  

22. Regarding these, men do greatly err: they know  not their true nature, nor become participants of the  sun-gleam.  
23. Blessed are they who do receive thereof: who  shine and burn and are crowned.  
24. And he said: Hast thou heard of the ways through  which the Splendid Ones go forth? Seek—meditate— retire into the wilderness: in the caverned mountains  seclude thy soul.*  


CHAPTER V.  
Beautiful art thou, O Sun!  
Yet I will not bow to thee in worship;  
And thou, Moon, art fair indeed;  
Yet will not my soul adore thy circle.  
I have seen ye tremble in light,  
As if ye were living Creatures;  
Yet I know that ye are ministers only:  
And that God is your Divine Master.  
He shall be my Sovereign:  
Before His Throne will I bend low:  
I will not worship the Rainbow Spirit  
Who is ever near and with the Lord.  
But thou, O Moon, art her footstool,  
And thou, O Sun, art but her veil.  
She casts thee round her, like a robe—  
Shall I worship a garment?  
In the mystical grove I see an Altar—  
It is the sacred Altar of the Father:  
On this shall I lay my heart,  
* Enoch did so. See Apocalypse , section 13; Part I., 525 \

And unto Him only shall I bow in adoration.  
And I saw a Glory of Light; clouds fine as air; and  in the centre thereof the Sun; and two Rainbows round  the Sun; and yet a third Rainbow in the opposite  quarter. But in the extreme ends of the two Rainbows  the central Sun was so brightly mirrored, that the intensity  of light and golden splendour made three Suns, when  there was but One.  
And lo! a vision of fire-red horses,  
They passed over seas of waters;  
In dew, in rain, in frost, in snow,  
Like meteor-lights they flashed.  
The mountains stayed them not;  
They put forth wings; they flew;  
Thunders in their dark feet;  
And in their eyes stars like fires.  
I heard their names:  
The silver Gates of the Clouds opened wide;  And downward into the glens,  
They passed like rivers of flame.  
He shewed me the Secret of the Lights,  
And the judgment which they carry on their wings,  They lighten for a blessing;  
According to the will of the Lord of Essence.  The secrets of the Thunders were revealed unto me:  When they grind as in a mortar above heaven:  When the night-clouds fly before them,  
And the sound of their wrath is heard.  
Their Voice is for peace and blessing,  
And for judgment also according to the Law:  When the guilty hear and know it,  

They hide themselves in caves and holes.  
Divinely beautiful is the survey of the Heavens,  And of the splendours that revolve therein:  
Beautiful in their majestic order;  
In their varied and majestic course,  
For their beauty and order are derived  
From Him who is the First,  
The One, Supra-Celestial Fire—  
The Ancient of the olden time.  
Afterwards I saw every Secret  
Of the Dark Splendours that are concealed;  
I grasped the sources of those Lightnings;  
Which bless and fertilize while they flash.  
O thrice blessed are ye,  
Ye pure Spirits of the earth,  
For whom a knowledge of those beautiful things  Has been prepared by your Lord and Father.  Ye shall exist in sunlight;  
In the rays of everlasting life,  
Whose beam shall shine for ages  
With a glory that never fails.  
1. Then another Spirit who proceeded with me spake,  and shewed me the first and last Secrets; the Mysteries  of the Heavens above; the mysteries of the earths be neath; and the beginnings of all things, and how the  Spirits of the Heavens are divided; and the Spirits who  rule the winds; and how the winds are numbered by  God; each in proportion to his strength and excel lence.  
2. He shewed me the force of the moon’s light, and  how its growth is regulated; and he disclosed to me the name she bears among the Immortals; the first is Ason Ya; the second Ebla; the third Benasi, and the fourth  Erae. And he narrated to me the divisions of the stars  in order, and their names, and the ranks of each division.  He shewed me how the lightning flashed, and how the  clouds do instantly obey; and the silent pause of the  
thunders; and the energy of the new-awakened bolt.  
3. The thunder and the lightning are one; yet are  they both, two forces; they move not with one spirit,  yet are they still indissolubly joined. For when the  lightning flashes forth, then indeed the thunders sound;  and the guiding Spirits pause and rest, until the space of  the time is passed.  
4. He shewed me how each is restrained as with a  bridle, and is impelled by the force of the spirit, which  sweeps them over the mighty spheres, as an arrow  loosened from the bow.  
5. And I beheld, as if in seven-fold lustre, Holy  Ancients: the Cherubim with uplifted wings of glory;  the Seraphim and the Ophanim of light; the pure and  burning Chasmalim of starry shape; Asarim and Isarim;  myriad and innumerable millions they were; their songs  and music filled the Universe.  
6. Seas of light flowed before me, far into extended  space; oceans with towers and spires and obelisks on  their snow-white shores.  
After this he gave me the signs,  
He made known symbols and secrets  
Of all the hidden wisdom  
In the Book of my Father,*  
* The Book of my Father means the Apocalypse. Section 8.  (See Part I., 521);—They gave to her the two wings of an Eagle to flee into Hermon, where was her place;—and the Naronic Cycle,  where the Sun and Moon conjoin, with Six Stars, are commemo rated in the two Eleusin medals which I copy from Beger. The  Rainbow surrounds the Holy Spirit.  

And in the mystic parables  
Of the All-Powerful Spirit;  
Who is there whose heart softens not  
Whose nature is not troubled at these things?  
Light of the Universe!  
When shall I return me to Thee?  
When shall I go back unto the ancient places,  The paradise-bowers of Primeval Love?  
There the mighty Triad of Beauty  
Shines in white resplendency;  
Armoured in the diamond-light of heaven:  
With bows and arrows of golden beam.  
Around the Fire-Altar  
Rising in the midst of ocean,  
Washed by ten thousand darkling waves,  
They bend, they pray, they sing.  
The Rainbow rises out of the Ocean;   
But the Spirit shines in loveliness,  
The waves leap up with silver on their crests;  She breathes delight and peace through all.  
A hymn arises out of the mystic cells,  
The song of Hu, the Lord of the Universe:  
It impels as if with fiery force  
An effluence through all that live.  
Their natures beat with fire-energy;  
They swell with joy and with a calm wisdom;  And circle round the White Stone of Might,  Whose face is the Mirror of the Spirit.  
O Mighty One, small as the mote,  
O Glorious One, larger than the Universe;  
Our Lord, our God, our Mysterious Sire,  
In Thee alone do we put faith.  
Thou art Life; Thou art Light;  
Thy form is translucent sunshine;  
Lord of Waters! Lord of Worlds!  
The Great, the Ancient, the Infinite.  
And I saw a holy Vision in the Heavens.  
In the two medals above (which I take from Beger), Sacer  Ceres, in the first, holds the Branch or symbol of the Buddha:  

And He said, Who will go?  
And a peal of thunders answered:  
The Universe was wrapped in dazzling flame;  It quivered in the hold of lightnings.  
Hear ye, hear ye, said the Thunders,  
The Branch of the Lord is beautiful;  
He alone knoweth no change,  
But his fruit is an everlasting glory.  


CHAPTER VI.  
1. And I heard One speak:  
2. In the seventh of the first was He born, while the  Holy and the Just awaited him with patience.  
3. But after him, in the second, great wickedness did  arise, and fraud did spring forth.  
4. Afterwards, in the third, a Man of the Tree of  Purity, is made manifest: the Branch thereof shall bloom  for ever.  
5. Next, in the fourth, visions of the All-Powerful  shall be seen: the order of generation after generation.  6. Then, in the fifth, the House of Glory and of Might  shall be raised for ever and ever.  
7. In the sixth, there shall be darkness, and in it shall  a Man ascend.  
8. In the seventh, the Righteous shall receive a sword  to execute judgment upon the evil.  
9. In the eighth, shall be the Pure, chosen from the  Tree of Everlasting Beauty.  
She wears the helmet of Venus Cabira. In the second She holds  the Winged Hermes of Heaven, with his roll, or Apocalyptic  Volume, in his hand. Behind her is the Ancile and the Mirror  of the Universe; supported by the Universe itself.  

10. In the ninth, the virginity of the Righteous shall  be revealed to the whole world.  
11. In the seventh of the tenth, an everlasting judg ment shall be executed: heaven shall spring forth in the  midst of the angels.  
12. The Stars of Shesti Matri shall be revealed.* And  a long interval shall pass, and gleam fitfully.  
13. The former heaven shall wane away; a new heaven  shall appear; all the Powers of the Most High shall  shine with seven-fold splendour, lustrous as serpents of  fire.  
14. The House of the King shall be built up for ever.  
15. The Voice ceased.  
16. And I was lost in wonder: the darkness of  mystery on my soul and spirit. And I could not speak.  
Rise, arise, O King of the earth:  
Gird thy spirit with the eagle;  
Soar into the Divine Presence:  
Think not, as mortals think.  
I rose in clouds of golden splendour,  
In flame-mists; in a trance;  
I saw the Chair of Rainbows.  
I saw the splendid gleaming Seraphs.  
Happy, oh! how happy are they,  
Who see these Palaces of Glory;  
Waving, rolling in an eddy of flame;  
With the splendid foam of fire.  
* That is the Child of Six Mothers, of the Nereus or Naros. By  the Buddhists he is called Sosi-Osh, which may be translated either  the Ocean-Saviour or the Fire-Saviour—each alluding to the  Mother, the Holy Spirit. Sosiosh means also the Six, or Naronic  number of the Holy Spirit—that is, Her Son, the Messenger. See  Part III., Primitive Roots, xxi., xxv.  

The Luminous One gives Light  
To all these splendid spheres:  
HU-MAYA-LUC:—  
I fell upon my face in fear.  
And when a thousand years passed,  
He graved upon my thigh:—  
Like a thunder-cloud the Raven passed:  
But his beak dropped blood.  

The First Psalm

Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon His Name:  Make known His deeds among the people;  
Sing unto Him: sing psalms unto Him;  
Talk ye of all His wondrous works.  
Glory ye in His holy Name;  
Let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.  Seek the Lord and His Strength:  
Seek ye His face continually.  
Remember His marvellous works that He hath done;  His wonders and the judgments of His mouth.  He is the Lord our Gඈൽ:  
His judgments are in all the earth.  
Be ye mindful always of His covenant.  
The word which He commanded to a thousand genera tions,  
Saying: Touch not mine Anointed Ones,  
And do my Prophets no harm.  
And when they went from nation to nation,  And from one kingdom to another people,  
He suffered no man to do them wrong,  
Yea, He reproved kings for their sakes.  
Sing unto the Lord, all the earth,  
  

Shew forth from day to day His salvation.  
Declare His Glory among the nations,  
His marvellous work amid all peoples,  
For great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised,  He also is to be feared above all gods.  
Glory and honour are in His presence;  
Strength and gladness are in His place;  
Give unto the Lord, ye kindreds of the people,  Give unto the Lord glory and strength.  
Give unto the Lord the glory due unto His Name,  Worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness.  Once ye were as Spirits before Him;  
Gleaming in the beauty of the sun;  
But now a fallen race,  
Ye sigh after the Golden Seats (4).  
Tremble thou earth;  
The world also, and all that be in it;  
Let the Heavens be glad; let the earth rejoice;  Let all men say, The Lord reigneth;  
Let the sea roar and the fulness thereof;  
Let the fields rejoice and all that is therein.  
Then shall the trees of the wood  
Sing out and shout at the presence of the Lord;  Because He cometh to judge the earth,  
And to give splendour to the Sons of Truth.  O! give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good,  For His mercy endureth for ever.*  
* This Hymn appears in the so-called Psalms of Daoud, cv.,  and in 1 Chron., xvi., 22. I have alluded to it in Part I., 421.  



CHAPTER VII.  
1. The Word revealed unto Enoch: a blessing to the  pure, who shall exist in the days of tribulation; but to the  wicked and ungodly it shall be a stumbling-block. I, Enoch,  was with God; I made answer and spake with Him, while  mine eyes were veiled, yet opened; and while I saw Holy  Visions in the Heavens. These did the Divine Ones  shew: the Lion-Gods.* 

* See Part III., General Index, Lion-Symbol; also 315, 348,  360. See Montfaucon for gem prefixed to this chapter. Chifflet  gives the second, which is the Lion of the Naros, with the Islâm symbol of the conjunction of the Sun and Moon. This Lion is seen  among the Egyptian and Nemroud reliques in the British Museum.  * Kircher says that Annius, in his Commentary on the Apocry phal Berosus, has asserted that in the Volume of Enoch was con tained the prophecy concerning two total destructions of the earth,  which should come to pass, one by water, the other by fire.  
 
From them did I learn all things;  
By them was I filled with understanding;  
I beheld the things which are not now,  
But which shall come to pass in future days:  In generations that are yet to be;  
When the Son of Heaven shall shine forth.  
By them I spake, and did converse with those  Who shall go forth in glory from their habitation,  The Holy and the Mighty,  
The Rulers of the sphere of man.  
In after days they shall sit upon ZION,  
And call their hosts around them.  
They shall be made manifest in lion-strength,  In the majesty of the power of heaven.  
All shall be awed;  
The Children of Darkness shall be terrified;  Fear and trembling shall overcome them;  
They shall be scattered to the ends of the earth.  The lofty mountains shall be troubled;  
And the hills shall be depressed with shame;  They shall melt like honeycombs in Fire;  
The earth of man shall be deluged,*  
The sons of flesh that are thereon shall die,  
And judgment shall be pronounced aloud,  
Yea, even the righteous also shall be on trial;  They shall be weighed in the balances of GOD.  

But to those in fine shall Paradise be opened;  They shall belong to Gඈൽ, and shall be happy in His  light;  
And the splendours of the Beautiful One of Heaven  Shall enfold them round within its circle.  
Behold He comes with thousands of the Saints,  To execute judgment upon the wicked;  
For their crimes shall the sinful suffer;  
And the carnal shall be covered with confusion.  The boundaries of the Universe shall flash lightnings;  The voice of thunders pealing shall be heard;  And bolt on bolt redoubled amid darkness,  
Shall testify the presence of the Holy One.  


CHAPTER VIII.  
All who are in the heavens know the order of the  heavens;†  
 * The above medal is in Beger: it represents the Holy Spirit  borne by the Lion, or God of the Universe. In her right hand is  the Rod or Sceptre of Power; in the left, the Kosmos.  
† This is a mystic shadowing forth of the Naros, in words that  would be intelligible only to those who were themselves aware of  that Sacred Cycle, while to an ordinary reader it would be sealed.  

The stars wander not from their orbits;  
They rise and set at the moments that are marked out;  They disobey not the commands of Him who ruleth.  The high Intelligences look down upon the earth,  And see the things that are done therein;  
They mark the advancing and retreating tide of events,  From the beginning unto the end of the end.  And every Manifestation of the Supreme Being*  Is invariable in his period of appearance;  
As the summer followeth the winter;  
As the cloud and dew refresh the wilderness.  When the trees wither and the leaves fall off,  And the beautiful seems an image of decay;  Yet they know that all shall be in time renewed,  And that the young blossoms shall bud forth.  And when the days of summer come,  
And thou seekest for a shade from the burning heats,  And thou canst not walk upon the parched earth,  Nor upon the rocks because of the glowing beam,  Then the trees put forth their leaves;  
Their green branches produce fruit and shadow;  And the sweet and shady bowers of delightfulness  Succeed to the dry boughs of winter.  
He who liveth for ever doeth these things;  
They are His work, as the rings revolve;  
They are subservient to GOD, and they are immutable  also;  
For as He has ruled, even so do they come.  
As the rivers flow into the seas from out the seas,  So flow the years into the cycles of the years;  
* The Messianic Messenger, called the Manifestation, or Pha nerosis, that is, the Phani Spirit of Love.  

As the seas re-flow into the rivers from the rivers,  So do the cycles blend into the new-commencing years (5). 

 
CHAPTER IX.  
1. Hearken unto me, O Men; hear ye, in what manner  ye have sinned, and how ye have departed from the  straight paths which the Man of God* did show.  In the morning of the earth there was beauty,  In the golden morning of the Ancients;  
When the race of mortals newly born  
Bloomed like trees in summer.  
2. But after sons† had multiplied on the earth, and  their daughters did appear beautiful to the eye, then did  the Children of Heaven‡ look upon them, and they  became enamoured of those fair women.  
3. Like horses did they neigh,  
* * * * *  
4. And they said unto each other, Go to, let us take  unto ourselves wives from those;§ are not we the chosen  children? and shall we not do as seemeth good unto our  hearts?  
5. Then did they debate whether they should abjure  the sacred command; but they resolved to do so, and to  contract marriages with the daughters of those who  renounced God. And their leader, Sam-Iaza, said unto them, May it not be that some of you will repent? and  abandoning your Chief perfidiously, shall it not come to  pass that I alone shall suffer death?  
* Chadâm, or Adi-Buddha.  
† Those who had not followed the Laws of Adam were so  called.  
‡ The followers of Adam were so called.  
§ The Sacred College, or Seven Pagodas, had forbidden all  intermarriage with the vicious, an ordinance imitated by other  eastern nations (6).  

6. But they answered, saying, We swear, and bind  ourselves as one with joint execration that we will not  change from this our purpose, but will do the thing that  we have sworn to do.  
7. And they made oath all together, and bound them selves as one by mutual execrations; and they descended,  to the number of two hundred, upon Ardath, which is  near Mount Ar.  
And the women whom they took brought forth giants,  Mighty men and terrible;  
And these giants begat the Naphelim,*  
And from the Naphelim the Eliudi sprang.  
Vast were their numbers;  
And they taught themselves and their wives also,  Poisons, and incantations, and magic arts,  
And the things and thoughts of Satwanas.  
And Azael made swords and breastplates,  
And melted metals of the earth,  
And fabricated for women gold and silver,  
To bear ornaments like harlots,  
And to polish stones,  
And to give them false splendour,  
And to use colours as dyes,  
And to violate the Laws of God.  
And perverting all the ways of right,  
Wickedness stalked over the earth;  
* Clouds, Phantoms, Ghosts, as contradistinguished from real  Essences. For every evil thing is unreal, having no permanence.  

And they fed hatreds in their hearts,  
And did evil with the roots of herbs.  
8. And of those who polluted themselves, Yakûn  misled the sons of the priests, and, causing them to  descend, led them wandering among the sons and  daughters of the infidel. And he whose surname  was Kesabela gave evil counsel to the sons of the  priests, and led them to corrupt their minds and  bodies by intermarriage with the generation of the  wicked.  
9. And he whose surname was Gader-Eli was  a maker of death instruments; by his hand were  these things given unto the sons of earth from thence  for ever.  
10. And he whose surname was Penemue discovered  unto the children sweets and bitters; he revealed hidden  mysteries, and exposed writings that ought not to be  exposed.  
11. And he whose surname was Kasyadi disclosed  appearances of Gods and Spirits; the Epiphany of the  Divine from the Womb, and of the Pure who was  removed from the bite of the Dragon, and the Manifes 
tation in the light of splendours, of the Faithful One,  the Child of Tebet.* He revealed the sacred number  Kebel,† which the Most High, who dwells in majesty,  made manifest unto his own Holy Ones, and whose name  also is Beka.‡  
 * A further explication of the mysteries of the Apocalypse  which was given by this apostate priest. Tebet is the mystic  Teba, the Naros or 600.  
† This word Cheb-El is explained Part III. xiii. It is the  basis of Kabbala.  
‡ This is an anagram of Keba, the occult name of the Tree of  Version 20180823


12. He divulged that ever Holy Name, which ought  not to be made known to any, breaking through his oath  of power, for powerful and strong was that oath. This  is the Sacred Akao of the Almighty, whereby the  Heavens were suspended before ever the earths were  formed; the Akao that ought not to be revealed.  
13. This is the Holy Name, whereby the earths were  founded on the floods; while the agitated waters rushed  wildly out of their dark and secret beds: whereby also  the seas were formed, and the foundations of the seas  were laid; whereby the rocks were raised against its  anger: the rocks that are unchanged for ages.  
14. This is the Akao that makes strong the Abyss, so  that it shall remain immoveable for ever; by this the  Sun and Moon complete their march, swerving not from  their appointed course.  
15. By this Name the stars revolve; and when their  names are called, they come and go; and the winds are  ruled, and the thunders also, and hail and lightnings and  the seasons.  


CHAPTER X.  
1. And all these, Chiefs among the Watchers, practised  dread iniquities; they polluted themselves with strange women; they made a mock of holy ordinances. They  destroyed birds and harmless creatures; they bowed  them to the images of beast and fish; they ate flesh  and drank blood until the very earth did groan and  sob.  

Knowledge. Postel. Hist. Orient. 206. But Kubè was a name of  Kube-le, or the Holy Spirit Goddess, receptaculum totius naturæ,  after whom is the Arabic black stone or Kaba. The meaning of  the passage therefore is that he revealed secrets connected with  the Ineffable Virgin-Mother, which none but the highest of the  Initiated should know. Akao is one of the divine names of the  Spirit-Sun. Note that Naos, the Greek word for Temple, is  mystic; the N and S indicate Naros, of which the Central Light  is AO.  

2. Impiety was spread over the nations, and harlotry  prevailed in all places; and Amazarach practised witch craft; and Arimerz solved magic questions.  
3. And they worshipped false gods, Nidra, Levata,  Isarta, Patiki; and they did magic in the name of Abdi,  and Og, and Nura, and Adsarta.  
4. And they corrupted all their ways; and observed  the spheres for unlawful uses; and men and animals  cried out to God, and their voices reached the  Thrones.  
5. Then the Holy Spirits, looking from Heaven, beheld  blood over the earth and the iniquity wrought thereon,  and how the spirits of the souls cried out.  
6. The great Archangels of God, Michael, Uriel,  Raphael, Gabriel, looked and saw evil in all places, and  that wickedness had corrupted all. And the Spirits said,  It is the voice of their weeping. The earth is sad, even  to the Gates of God; and now to Thee, O Holy One of  Heaven, the souls of men do cry.  
7. Saying, shrieking: O thou Holy One, justice, justice  from the Most High God.  
8. Then these Spirits said unto their Lord: Lord of  lords, God of gods, the throne of thy glory is for ever;  and for ever and ever is thy name sanctified. Blessed be  thy Throne, thou King of kings!  
9. Thou hast made all: Thou possessest power over all: all things are open before Thee; neither can there  be aught hidden from thine eye.  
10. Thou seest what these do, practising all corruption.  They have joined themselves to sin and shame. Black  are their sorceries. They unto whom thy might of power  was given have polluted themselves with the daughters  of men; they have gone in unto them, and done iniquity,  devising crimes from dawn till dark.  
11. And their wives—they have brought forth Giants,*  so that earth is red with abominations; and thy children  they cry out before Thee, complaining at the Gates of  Heaven; yea, the very souls of the spirits of the dead  do cry;† their lamentation cometh out of the grave.  
12. And the voice of their weeping rises; the echo of  their sadness from below; they cannot shield them selves from the ungodly; nor from sinners make their  escape.  
13. Thou who knowest all things knowest these also  and their fruits; yet Thou hast not spoken to thy Holy  Ones, neither hast Thou declared thy will.  


CHAPTER XI.  
1. And Michael said unto Raphael : Bind SamIaza hand and foot; cast him headlong into darkness;  cover up his face.  
2. Restore the earth which he has corrupted; announce life—even a resurrection: all the sons of men  shall not perish: the slaves of soft beds shall be de stroyed. Every oppressor shall die from the earth; the  children of the Watchers, the earth tyrants; but the good  are as trees that bloom for ever, beside their fountains or  by running streams.*   
* In fierceness and power. These were fed on the marrow of  lions, bears, and tigers, and were brutal and sanguinary to the  greatest degree.  
† The writer in Genesis imitates this. The voice of thy brother’s  blood crieth unto me from the ground. iv. 11.  

3. Thus shall it come to pass that the evil shall not  see the days of holiness, the days of beauty; when the  pure shall have begotten thousands, and their sabbaths  shall be gardens of peace.  
4. In those days the face of the earth shall be sown  with seeds of righteousness; it shall be filled with trees  of blessing; every Tree of Paradise shall grow therein.  In it shall vines be planted; every vine shall give forth  abundantly; for one measure of seed a thousand; for one  measure of olives ten presses of oil. (7)  
5. From all injustice it shall be purified; from all  oppression, from all impiety; all manner of pollution  and unrighteousness shall perish from the sphere of  earth.  
6. Then shall the children of men be pure, and all  nations shall adore God alone; He will rain down bless ings from heaven. He will cause them to descend upon  the earth. And upon all the labours of man shall the benediction of Adnai flow; peace and justice shall  assume the sceptre; and reign like kings from Heaven. 

* This and the following passages must have been before Hesiod,  when in his Theogony, he speaks of Zeus having sent the Titans  beneath the broad-wayed earth and bound them in irksome bonds.  There under murky darkness the Titan gods lie hidden in a dark  dreary place near the extremities of the vast earth. They may  not go forth for a brazen chain binds them, and a wall goes round  them on both sides; there the sons of obscure night hold their  habitations, &c., &c., 716.  

  
CHAPTER XII.  
Before all these things I, Enoch, did exist,  
But concealed and secret in the deeps; (8)  
No man knows where I was;  
Neither can the sons of mortals know.  
But I was mingled high with the Holy Ones,  And blessing the Great Lord and Father,  
In a far-off place where darkness dwells not;  Nor any shadow is beheld.  
There a Voice came unto me,  
A Voice Supreme and Holy:  
It awakened me up,  
That with a tongue of flesh I might proclaim.  The Eagle Voice raised me, saying:  
Go Enoch, kinsman of the Sun,*  
Say unto the Watchers who have fallen away,  Who have deserted their pure calling;  
Who have polluted themselves on soft beds,  Abandoning their silent sanctuaries;  
That in exile they shall feel no peace,  
Because they did corrupt themselves with lusts;  They shall have no joy in offspring;  
They shall wail over the destruction they have caused;  They shall weep for the days of innocence,  
* The Hindus call it Archi-Bandu, which has the same  meaning. The mythos of Jesus preaching to the spirits in prison  is founded on this chapter of Enoch.

When truth and mercy were in their hearts.  

We rode upon the Whirlwind’s wing—  Over the dark-red storms;  
We heard the clash of many tempests;  We heard the groans of many thousands.  Lightnings from the thunder-clouds  
Surcharged with deep black smoke;  
Like bright-red horses  
Drawing chariots of iron.  
And in my hand a Sword,  
Like a waving meteor:  
And the heaven seemed ablaze with light,  As I wielded the mighty blade.  
And a cry of desolate mourning,  
And the sighs of many sorrowing ones;  But a Voice of Power said:  
Even so—this judgment is just.  
Their swords were bathed in blood:  
Their arrows dripped with fire:  
And the pale phantoms of the fallen  Passed us in their gloomy clouds.  
And passing on into the places of the Watchers,  I said unto Iaza: O thou fallen!  
A sentence is gone forth against thee;  Behold! thou shalt have peace no more.  He by whom we live,  
He who is All in himself;  
The Invisible, the One,  
God hath sent me to you.  
Thy sin shall bind thee in brass;  
 
Neither shall relief come upon thy limbs;  
Nor supplication win pity;  
For great is thy wickedness.  
1. And I passed onwards, and saw others; they trem bled, pale in terror; and they besought me to intercede  with God, that they might obtain pardon.  
2. Then did I make a record of their supplication, and  of the sufferings which I saw, and of the mercy which  they sought, that they might have peace.  
3. And wending onwards I passed Waters of Vasta tion, of Dan-Ba-Don unto the west of Ar; and reading  there the record of their punishments, behold, I was  transfused.  
4. And lo, a Dream like a Cloud, and Visions in the  flame of Gඈൽ; and I lay and saw a wondrous sight re vealed before the fallen of the Most High.  
5. And when I woke, I went into the place, the De sert of Waters of Vastation: the name thereof is Oubel seyäel, and there I saw them with their faces veiled.  
6. And I related the Vision, and the Dream, and  spake in these words: but their faces were cowled in  darkness.  
7. O fallen ones! who are under judgment; the prayer  of your suffering is unheeded: The Voice of Gඈൽ hath  spoken it; ye have abandoned Him, and are abandoned  of Him.  
8. Weep, and supplicate in silence, but murmur not  against the Decree. Condemn yourselves, not the Divine  Law, which exiles the impure from purity.  
Then I saw, as it were, a Shadowy Cloud,  
Whose sides could no eye penetrate:  

Methought I was involved in its depths,  And from these depths I could not look upward.  I beheld also a Flame of Fire,  
And glittering Mountains whirled around.  They were agitated terribly from side to side;  And out of their breasts Voices came.  Then did I inquire of one of the Spirits,  Saying: What is this flashing thing?  
It is not in Heaven but a Sphere of Fire;  And in it is the voice of lamentation.  He said, Into that place fall blasphemers:  The Spirits of those who meditate and work evil;  Who pervert the Oracles of God, 
Which He reveals by his Apostles.  
O Pillar of Fire,  
Thou who leadest my soul onward:  
To resist the arm of death;  
To be as still and strong as the rock.  
Let me look upon thy face, O Splendour!  Let me hear thy many-voices,  
Soft and powerful as the sea-waves  
When they dash upon some lonely shore.  I follow Thee amidst mists and clouds,  And the heavenly lights of the Star of Morning;*  And when the night gathers in darkness,  Still amid the groves I follow thee, O Flame.  Dusky gloom rushes from the mountains,  The stars are faintly visible:  
Yet still, O Pillar of pure Fire,  
I follow Thee through flying clouds.  
* The Holy Spirit.  

Art thou not the Sole, Supreme God?  
In whom are all secrets wrapped:  
Round Thee clusters the Rainbow:  
But at thy feet I see the lions of battle.  
Thou readest all my secret thoughts;  
My soul is a sun-beam before Thee;  
Great Father! Ancient Mystery;  
How shall I give thee homage?  
I rose, I rushed from mountain to mountain;  Yea, even into the seas I plunged,  
But the Pillar of Fire glittered ever,  
Yet I could not touch it with my hand.  

The second Psalm

Reverence be unto thee, O Lord of Worlds!  Reverence be unto thee, O Eternal One!  
Reverence be unto thee, O God of Justice!  
The emblem of Mercy to those who serve Thee.  Who art the Dispeller of all pain,  
The King of all things:  
The Guardian of the Great Universe;  
The possessor of all things.  
Thou art Lord of the All,  
The proper form of all existences and appearances;  Thou bestowest salvation;  
Be propitious, O Most High God.  
Acshava! Acshava! Acshava!  
Let us adore thee in groves and forests:  
Let us kneel to thee on high places,  
Under the open heavens and the stars.  
O Eternal! O thou Life!  
Thou who art the most beautiful and wise;  

The Supreme Intelligence of Wisdom;  
The source of the Just and Holy:  
The First Principle:  
Thou art not Fire;  
Thou art not Air, nor Water, nor any element,  But the Spirit-Essence of the Universe.  
In love, in gratitude, in veneration;  
May we all kneel before Thee,  
Thanking the Almighty Bestower  
Of goodness boundless as the Infinite.  

CHAPTER XIII.  
1. Then I looked and turned myself to another part,  where I beheld a deep Valley burning with fire, and in  this Valley I saw monarchs, pontiffs, mighty men, bound  in strong iron; in iron fetters without weight.  
2. Then spake I unto their Angel; Who are these  in fetters, and why are they bound? and he answered,  They are the sons of Azaz-eel; they are children of  Hell, and they are fast in the rivets of condemnation.  They have cast themselves into this place so that they  may reap the dread reward of their crimes; for that  they became evil ministers of evil.  
3. O ye kings! O ye pontiffs! and ye mighty men!  who hold high places, would that ye could behold these  things! and that ye could see the Mighty One on His  Throne of Glory!  
4. They moved in punishment and darkness, in woe,  in weeping, in remorse, in net-works of brass and  rivets of iron; the days of their life were past, but the days of their judgment are without number.  They cried aloud to the Eagle, but he heard them not;  to the Serpent; to the Leviathan of the Waters; to  the Lion-gods of seven-fold splendour. And to the  Holy Light from which is imaged all the light that  glitters in the sun. They cried also unto all the  Splendours, but they cried and were not heard.  
5. And the receptacles of the Waters which are above  the skies were opened out, and the Fountains of  Waters which are under the stars put forth their tor rents, and the roar of seventy times seven Thunders was  heard booming over that dark and sullen ocean, so that  my very soul melted into the drip of ice-hills.  

Blessed be thy name, O God,  
Who ridest on the terrible whirlwind;  
Who did’st give a shore to the sea;  
Who did’st say unto the mountains: Thus far.  I hear Thee in the mountain torrents,  
And in the cry of tempests,  
When the forest bends like a reed;  
When thy hand puts forth its terror.  
I know Thou art a terrible Essence;  
A night of gloom—a sea of darkness;  
As lightning whirling amid fearful peals—  
Let the children of air bow down and weep.  Why should the evil-hearted hope  
That thou wilt lift them to the Gardens?  
Why should the slime-brood feed their thoughts  That they too shall ascend among the virgin-bright?  
In this place saw I an Angel of God,  
Version 20180823
212 THE BOOK OF GOD. 
His name was Rasi-el;  
He reclined beside a shining stream,  
But when he saw me he came near.  
He shewed me a Book bright as fire,  
In whose leaves I read Mysteries;  
And he placed it in my hand saying,  
These are Institutes of Heaven.  
I looked upon its silver white pages  
With marks and signs like sapphire;  
And viewed with wonder and awe  
The multiform images of the Concealed;  
Over its surface the stars seemed moving;  
Eddying flames whirled;  
I took it into my hand;  
It was as if I held the Sun.  
Like myrrh and frankincense it was;  
Every page sparkled with light:  
This also did the First receive,*  
* The first, or Adi Buddha, is seen in the above gem from  Beger; he symbolizes the First and the Twelfth Messenger, as  mentioned, ante 7. S. C. means Salvator Chadama and Salvator  Cwenila; the great Mexican Buddha.  

When he descended from day to darkness.  
A Voice cried out; it cried aloud;  
Hu-d-ali, Hu-d-ali,
It was a Voice of Flame;  
Like lightning flashed above the heavens.  
Then from the opposite quarter I heard,  
Ked-Ali, Ked-Ali;  
My soul kindled into fire;  
Shew me that Sacred Sanctuary.  
A flash; a cloud of beams; a glory;  
A whirlwind of light and grandeur;  
A burst of sweetest music;  
A chorus of ten thousand harps—  
She shone in all her beauty;  
A Star of Morning; a full-orbed Moon  
In the brilliant ring of full-orbed splendours—  I looked—I was transfused into a sea.  
Then out of the Ocean rose  
The Daughter of Light and Fire  
Moving in harp-music;  
The waves were gardens of fragrance.  
As the Sun bursts out of a cloud,  
And sheds its glory over the waters;  
So from her morning-eyes  
The beauty of love flashed.  
O Spirit of the Seven Rays,  
Bearer of the Mystic Torch,  
Queen of the Choir of Stars,  
Bless me with thy mystic light.  

My son, the glories of the earth are shadows,  Avoid them, for they are evil also;  
But after the grandeur of the heavenly places  Let thy heart aspire perpetually.  
God hath clothed them with robes and diadems;  He hath filled them with the beauty of light:  I tell thee, for I have seen them with my eyes,  In visions of immortality they have been shewn;  The Golden-Handed One of Heaven raised me;  He bore me aloft into Paradise,  
Even unto the Ensuphic Sphere,  
The Central Star of the Starry Universe.  This is the Sphere of the Infinite,  
The first, the greatest, the most celestial;  Where is the Presence and the Power of God,  And the Spirit of God abides in Glory.  The Ten Splendours, or Spheres of Being,  Stood forth before me in one wondrous glance;  I saw innumerable living pictures;  
The breathing images of the Divine in Heaven.  I saw the pure and lovely representatives  Of the all-beautiful Essence of God;  
His whole heaven was revealed as in a picture,  Resplendent with harmony and light;  
The mystery of the Triadic Powers,  
Life, Intellect, and Spirit,  
Gleamed forth in the Divine Fiery Essence of God,  And my heart melted away in silence.  
I saw also the Everlasting Cycles of the Stars;  And how they roll in flame perpetual;  
And the Spirit of God diffusing life  
Like sweet ambrosia from a cup.  

And I passed onward to a River of Fire  
Which emptied itself into a great Ocean,  
And many large torrents did I then behold;  
Torrents of Death, and Torrents of Destruction:  And Vapour and Night, and Shadows and Silences,  And all the Mystery of the Deeps.  
I went to where those born of flesh descend;  I beheld the Mountains of an everlasting winter;  Places from which the ice-waters roll  
Through many dreadful Cataracts.  
Here shall they be bound who made men profane,  Leading them to wrong by wrongful counsel,  So that they offered sacrifice to satans,  
And mocked the worship of The One.  
But they and their’s shall be judged together  On the day when all wickedness shall suffer;  The sheep shall follow the wolf-like shepherd  Into pastures that conduct to death.  
Here were beasts of monstrous form,  
Creatures of a wild and strange appearance,  And birds various in their shapes,  
And in their faces and discordant cries.  
And afar off, in certain Dark Valleys,  
I saw sinners who had denied God;  
They were expelling and hurling one the other  Into Gulfs of lower darkness.  
The Lord of Spirits punished them not;  
He is the Universal Love:  
Evil in all places, and at all times,  
Becomes its own avenger.  


CHAPTER XIV.  
Three orders of life are there in the Universe: Celestial, Spiritual, and Material life; but the first are tenants of  the Heavens, in brightness and dominion next to God. But  spirits are pure and devoid of flesh; they are of innume rable ranks and degrees; according to their beauty is  their place, and according to their perfectness is their  beauty. But all material life is impure; its stages  and degrees are without number, according to the temper  of the animating principle, and to the form in which it  desires development. Spirits that grow impure by evil  thinking are incapable of living in the æther of Heaven;  they fall down headlong into space as a stone falls through  the air; and, sinking through immense distances into  Chaos, they eagerly desire some tangible hold to save  themselves from further degradation and from the agony  of their everlasting lapse. Then do they desire shapes  in harmony with their nature, and build unto themselves  bodies, moved thereunto by an everlasting instinct which  operates within by Universal Law. Thus the races of  men form themselves; having been pre-existent fallen  spirits who enter the flesh subtly and unseen, and in  the womb weave unto themselves bodies. They use the  materials that are at hand, fabricating organs for them selves by instinct, and in the appointed hour are born in  the shape which they have formed for themselves. For  man giveth not life to man, but the means only of developing life, and every man now living was the sculptor of  his own body and its organs. And this one maketh him self comely, and this one formeth himself to be a lover  of learning; and this one fabricates organs that degrade him, and this one is imperfect because he is unskilful.  Men differ in no wise from other living creatures save  only in the nature of their spirits; to some they are  inferior, but to others superior; but the same principle  of life animates all. And all life is developed in the same  mode by the instinct of spirit weaving unto itself a shape;  as the spider forms a web which no man could make; as the snail makes a shell which no finger could imitate. And  all spirits of the sub-celestial spheres are invisible until  they assume manifestations; they are everlasting Essences  and Powers which need a shape to be their medium of  development. The gods who shine beneath the Thrones  require a medium to make their brightness visible, and  each one makes this medium for himself in exact accord ance with his nature. So also is it with all other spirits;  who, that they may be visible and live in their Circles,  must possess a form suited to those Circles, and if they  lose their forms they can no longer live there. As man  when his body faileth can no longer live on earth, but  must go into another place, so is it with every other  spirit-development which transmigrates with the failure  of its form; and these forms each one fabricates for him self in correspondence with the nature of his desires. And  this assumes a pure, and that an impure development, as  it labours to carry out its longings. But if the nature  grows too beautiful for the form, and too elevated for the  sphere in which it lives, it lays aside that form and  quits that sphere, and ascending higher it assumes a  higher form; but if the nature grows too impure for  the form, and becomes too gross for the sphere in  which it lives; it lays aside that form, and quits that  sphere, and dying descends into a lower form. Thus it is with the races of mankind, who are spirits  making themselves visible by media, which media  are their corporeal bodies, to which they are conjoined  by the soul-principle. This soul is the bond or ligament which unites the spirit to the body, and when  this ligament is dissolved away then death ensues and  separation. This body corresponds in all its powers with  the spirit which giveth it life; for the spirit hath fabricated the body for itself in perfect agreement with its  nature. Hence the various powers and energies of man;  his changing passions and inclinations, infused, not by  God at the creating moment, but by the spirits themselves into their organs. For as they develope themselves  in precise conformity with their tempers, aspect, and ten dencies, every energy that is in the brain of man is placed  there by himself alone. Unjust it were in God to give  men various powers; to favour some and to defraud  others; to give a mighty intellect to one; to bestow a  puny understanding on another. God doeth not this  wrong; but every man is as he makes himself; and some  are great and some are base, because their spirits are  great or base. And this, if he makes himself nobler than  a man, lays aside his body and leaves the earth; he  ascends to a superior order of existence and assumes  development therein. But this, if it makes himself beneath a man, then laying aside his body and leaving  earth, he wanders into darkness and lapses lower until  he comes within the Cyclic Law.  


CHAPTER XV.  
Then did mine eyes behold another deep Valley:  Wide was its entrance:  
Vast and long were the approaches:  
Dark and silent was each vast recess.  
All who dwelt on land, or on the sea,  
Brought offerings thither:  
Yet was not that deep Valley filled:  
Ever it yawned for more.  
They whose hands produced iniquity,  
Who laboured to bring forth evil,  
Had there the fruit of their labours:  
The sinful fed upon their own crimes.  
They were corpses before the Lord of Life,  
They perished from the face of nature;  
I beheld them minister to their own punishment,  Choosing out satans from among themselves.  And I looked in terror on that Valley  
Where there was great perturbation:  
And the cry of a sad multitude;  
Where the waters were troubled.  
And Rivers of Flame flowed through it,  
And these were mingled with the Waters:  
And in these I saw the satans plunge  
In the madness of an infuriated guilt.  
And I saw many Spirits,  
And their voices rose to Heaven accusingly:  Then I besought him that he would make known,  Whose were these Spirits?  
He answered, saying:—These are they  
Who have been trampled under the feet of men:  They accuse their evil doers  
Until their seed shall perish from the earth.  
Six Angels mighty as the solar sphere  
Preside and watch over this Land of Shadow,  And these are the names of the Angels who watch  In the vigil whereunto the Lord hath sent them.  Uriel presides over the place itself,  
Governing its terror and tempests,  
And Raphael impels the wandering spirits,  And Raguel punishes those among them who rebel,  And Michael rewards those among them who do good,  And Sarakiel leads them into other spheres,  And Gabriel receives them at Ikaisat;  
These are the Holy Angels of Splendour  
Whom Gඈൽ hath set above the Land of Shadows,  Then did I make a circuit of this most dread place  Wherein nothing seemed complete or uniform;  But all was Chaos, Gloom, and Cloud,  
The Image of a mighty ruin.  
Neither was the workmanship of heaven in this place,  Nor the beauty of a well-poised sphere;  
But all was vacuous desolation;  
And all was shadow, silence, and dismay.  
And looking upon Seven Fires,  
Bound in it like great and rolling storms;  
I cried aloud, For what crime have they been burned?  And why have they been removed into this place?  And one of the Holy Angels  
Answered and said, Wherefore dost thou ask?  These are they who have defied God,  
And here they do abide until their day be done.*  
And after these things my Spirit was concealed;  
* These Seven Fires are Worlds filled with spirits that have  lapsed from light.  
 
It lay hidden for a while in Heaven  
With the Children of the Holy Spirit of Light,  And they walked as if on burning fires.  
Their robes, their garments were of snow-splendour;  Their countenances were crystal;  
And before their faces I saw two Rivers of Fire  Glittering like the bright jacinth.  
Then did I fall down before the Lord of Spirits;  But one of the Splendours lifted me up;  
He bare me into a secret place;  
There did the Spirit of Enoch lie concealed.  
O mortal, who art immortal;  
Thou who in clay partakest of the Eternal:  
Is thy soul of force to pierce the Dark?  
Canst thou read the Hidden?  
Those things which I have seen on high;  
Those things which I have unveiled—  
Are to the slaves of earth a riddle:—  
Dark as the Voices of the Stars.  
If thou givest not thyself heart and soul.  
Yea, and thine everlasting spirit unto their contem plation,  
Labouring by day; meditating in the night:  
Rejecting earth, and aiming after the spiritual:—  If thou doest not these things earnestly,  
Praying also unto the Supreme for aid,  
Know thou this, from me, the Messenger,  
Never shalt thou read their meaning.  
Thou shalt think, and think, and still strive:  
But the dawn of light shall not reach thee:  
Thou shalt be as one who, while a mortal,  
 
Labours hard to soar into the sun.  
But if, abandoning all earthly things,  Thou givest up thy whole nature to the search,  Thy soul itself shall be light;  
Thy spirit shall partake of the Wisdom of God.  

CHAPTER XVI.  
By command of the Eternal I make known truth.  
My son hearken to my speech;  
A Voice calls me; a Spirit is formed around me;  I reveal things needful to be known;  
Listen to the word of my mouth.  
Beloved, bind thyself to integrity:  
Approach it not with double heart:  
Walk not with the two-minded:  
Their tongues are scorpions.  
But persevere steadfastly in righteousness,  With Truth alone for thy companion:  She is an Angel from Heaven,  
Though she dwelleth some time on the earth.  I know that injustice exists;  
Yea, that it prevails greatly;  
Yet even on the earth retribution happeneth,  And the sinful are torn up by the roots.  Let the fear of the Lord be in all thy works,  And gain shall come to thee without labour.  Rise not with the sun, or retire with the moon,  Until thou hast bowed unto the Holy Name.  Greatest of all Spirits;  
Most exalted of all Intelligences;  

The First in the Heavenly Spheres;  
The Fountain of the Beautiful and Holy.  
The Lord of Justice goeth forth from Heaven.  He goes to put in force his Laws:  
The evil doers are swept away:  
They perish under the face of the sun.  
Every unholy tower shall crumble;  
It shall be burnt with its keepers in fire:  
The plough shall scatter its ruins;  
They shall fall into a judgment of death;  
The flaming womb of hell receives them;  
They are clothed in darkness and confusion:  From the Divine Presence they are expelled;—  The Sword of Flame warns them away.  
The pure shall wake as if from sleep;  
Wisdom shall be exalted high:  
But by the Sword shall sinners perish:  
In flame shall the blasphemer pine.  
Every work of the ungodly shall disappear;  
The habitations of the evil shall rot,  
But the House of the Great King and Judge  
Shall stand in majesty for ever.  
Garments of life are with the Lord of Spirits,  Pure robes of light everlasting;  
In the presence of Him, they shall not wax old,  Nor shall the splendour of their owners diminish.  And when the former heaven shall pass,  
A new heaven shall appear in its place,  
The pure shall shine in seven-fold light  
In the majesty of the Lord’s splendour.  

Be thou not aggrieved because of the times;
There is a period prescribed to all things;  
Let the truly good arise and gird himself  
With virtue, holiness, and love.  
Love shall descend in a shower of light  
Upon him who loveth truly:  
His way shall be a path of roses;  
He shall walk in everlasting sunshine.  
From mystic visions, from the Holy Spirit,  
Hath my soul learned these things:  
I have read them in the Tablets of Heaven;  
Let men receive them in the heart.  
My son, survey the various Heavens of Light;  The vast and varied Ocean with its treasures:  The islands, continents, and mountains;  
Whence have they come? and who made them?  Who formed them to shine in lustre?  
Who impelled their living energies?  
Who clothed them in robes of beauty?  
Imprinting grandeur upon every part.  
Was it not Gඈൽ?—the Divine Being:  
The Infinite and Intellectual Splendour?  
The one Immortal amid the mortal:  
The one Eternal amid that which dies.  
1. Hearken now unto me, for I speak the Truth of God as no other man speaketh it; that which is the  Truth is here in me; it existeth nowhere else among  mortals.  
2. I heard a choir of Holy Spirits, chaunting this  hymn amid the Heavens; soft was the music of their  voices as they rose to God like perfume.  
3. O thou, who seekest knowledge of the Holy One, be thyself imbued with sacred thoughts; follow not the  Divine for things that are unhallowed, nor pursue celes tial things with carnal purposes. God is Eternal; the  Universe is perpetual: God is exempt from time, but  the Universe subsists in time. God, who is all Life,  Light, and Love, subsisted prior to both Light and Dark ness: from all eternity in venerable solitude; He had no  equal, nor any rival.  
4. All men are equal before God; all men are the  children of Him! Mortal! forget not this truth; let it  be graven on thy inmost heart. In thy morning hour  meditate upon it; remember it in the time of night: let  it shape all thine actions, and never once be absent from  thy life.  
5. Wouldst thou see what God has made distinct?  observe the difference in trees and birds; the dove differs  from the peacock; the banyan differs from the rose. But  man hath the same bone and figure; is born in the same  way, and dieth in the same way: therefore write this  upon thine heart, that all men are one and the same.  
6. There is One Sovereign Power and One God who  made the Heavens and the Earths: who made the Oceans  and the force of Winds, and gave their brightness to the  lightnings.  
7. The Universe, which was a breath from God,  gradually grew into its perfect beauty, in millions of re volving years, by the laws of gravity, fluidity, and centri fugal force.  
8. God is not the Sun, yet is He the beauty of the  Sun. God is not the Ocean, yet is He the Majesty of  the Ocean. God is not the Wind, yet is He the Swiftness of the Wind. God is not the Light, yet is He the Splendour of the Light; for He is the Source in all things  of their essence, and of that which makes them glorious  and divine; hence their glory and divineness are but faint  types of Him who irradiates them with these very qualities.  
9. The Supreme Being is Life, Light, and Wisdom; a  Triad in name, but One in energy; He has moulded all existences and things visible and invisible out of mere  atoms.  
10. And out of the dark, whirling, stormy atmosphere  which was the Chaos of conflicting Powers, He formed  the bright harmonious oceans of ether; calm in solemn  beauty and repose.  
11. But when the Harmony of Heaven sounds, the  stars, the seas, the rivers, hear with rapture; the sky  rejoices at the splendid music, and Nature symphonizes  with Heaven.  
12. This Chaos, whereof the Universe is formed, was  void of form, or quality, or harmonized energy; but  was in its plastic nature capable of form, and of being  reduced into perfect proportions. It did not begin to  exist, nor can it be annihilated; but it perpetually undergoes transformations: whence arise all the modes of  existence and all the manifested appearances of matter.  13. Before the Universe was shaped into beauty the  whole Space was filled with God; the Infinite-Intellectual everywhere prevailed, until the Eternal Mind spake.  Then the Divine Masterpiece was formed; then the  Spirit-Light withdrew within a Circle; enfolding and  ensphering, as if in a ring, the mighty grandeur of the  new creation.  
14. This Universe is full of life: spirits visible in forms and images; spirits invisible to the natural eye,  and only seen within the sun-bright spheres.  15. Like the shadow which the golden rays of the  Evening Star cast, when bodies interpose between her and  the earth, are the thin ethereal luminous forms of those  who wander in these Shining Places. They are not male  —they are not female—they assume shapes at will: the  grandeur of the heroic form—the beauty of the child virgin.  
16. The Universe is composed of Nine Circles, im mense and splendid Spheres of glowing light; and with out all is the Sphere of Gඈൽ Eternal, embracing the  other worlds of creation.  
17. Three Spaces of Spheres are there—Spheres of  Heaven; the Circle of Space which none but Gඈൽ can  inhabit; the Circle of Causes which comprehends all  existences; the Circle of Happiness which all may  attain.  
18. Yet all this starry firmament of beauty shall pass  away, and cease to be in days to come; they shall be  changed by fire; they shall be renovated by water, as of  old in the olden time. God shall come forth out of the  places afar off; He will tread upon the mountains, and  the mountains shall give way under Him, and the valleys  shall be made straight before His feet, and the pillars of  the earths shall be shaken; the Voice of the Supreme  shall be heard; the mighty Heaven shall hear and trem ble; the sea and the waves shall quake with terror. The  sun shall not be visible; the moon also shall withhold  her light; but there shall be no death, nor any destruction; but all shall be renovated and made more  beautiful than ever.  

19. As the earth produces trees and flowers from its  bosom, but is itself neither trees nor flowers, but com prehends these beautiful things within it in their seed  or in their verdant bloom: as the sea produces shells  and roses, yet is itself neither shells nor roses, but  comprehends these beautiful things within the azure  valleys of its bosom. Even so is it with the All-Cir cling Father, from whom Spirits of all species proceed;  of Him, in Him, through Him and by Him, yet wholly  distinct and separated from Him.  
20. O Son! confide everlastingly in the Lord Gඈൽ:  put thy faith in Him, as in the Just Father; who giveth  his meed unto every creature; and He will not disap point thee in thy faith.  
21. Man is spirit, soul, and body; three properties in  one appearance; but his spirit-part is immaterial and  undying, and his bodily part is mortal. But the aro matic essence, which is the intermediate soul, partakes  of the earthly and the celestial; it survives the earth,  and transmigrates into a higher Sphere, but cannot enter  into that which is most high.  
22. God hath given as a guardian angel to every man  his conscience, which tells him what is right; which  rebels whenever he meditates evil. My son! let this angel  lead thee in all things.  
23. O great and splendid spirit who art in man, feed ing upon the garbage of the vile earth, go to the lion,  and take a lesson from the lion, who would die rather  than touch the leavings of a dog.  
24. The spirit longing to be free anticipates dissolution;  it looks forth into the Paradise-ether; it longs to leap into splendid light, freed from the mortal body which is  its chain.  
25. As the body of the dead changes into a new form  of life, developing itself in grass, or flowers, or worms; even so his spirit, which is immortal, passes into existence  different from that which it possessed before.  
26. The Twelve Incarnations of God are Twelve shin ing Mountains, bright as gems, with hearts of living  flame; with energies resistless as burning fire.  
27. Twelve are the Mountain-spheres or Mountains in  the Father’s house, which is the Universe: into each one  of these ascendeth a Messiah, with the glorious host of  his followers.  
28. There are Twelve shining Wells of pure Waters  which send forth Twelve Rivers; the Twelve Wells are  Spirits of the Messiahs; the Twelve Rivers are their  evangels.  
29. There is a Book of Light in Heaven divided into  Twelve Chapters; each chapter is the pure evangel of  one of the Incarnated Messiahs.  
30. The Laws that God hath once made never can be  changed even in the least; the laws of men are fallible  and are altered by men: the laws of God are infallible  and immutable.  
31. God is Eternal; He is wrongly designated when  He is called the Everlasting. The Eternal never had a  beginning: the Everlasting had a beginning, but will have  no end.  
32. God sends his Sacred Messengers of Truth into  other spheres as well as into the sphere of man. Look  aloft upon the starry heavens: unto all these orbs there  are Messiahs.  

33. As the life of man is ever sustained by fresh air,  and perishes if it receive it not, so do souls and spirits  perish if Truth (which is their life) be not renewed unto  them.  
34. God doeth all his wondrous works through the  medium of the first born One. This is the Spirit of God  who everlastingly reneweth all things.  

35 In the Paradise-sphere of God there is a Fountain*  Embowered around by olive trees and palms,  The sun ariseth in its bosom,  
The golden stars emerge from its silver zone.  Blue are its shining waters,  
Of a deep blue like a child’s dark eyes,  
And when its ripples glitter in the sunlight,  
They are as a thousand flashing emeralds.  
O pilgrim of Gඈൽ! seekest thou this Fountain?  Wouldst thou taste its sweet waters?  
O Wanderer of Eternity, follow  
And I will lead thee to its green solitude.  
Behold, the sun goeth before us in our journey,  The sun himself points out the way.  
O pilgrim! faint not, neither be a-weary,  
The Paradise-fountain is at hand.  
And when we reached this lonely Fountain  
* This Fountain or Elixir of life is probably alluded to in an  old Egyptian mythos. Isis, says Diodorus Siculus, invented a  medicine which imparts immortality to those who take it, and by  this she restored life to Or the (Messenger) after he had been found  in the water overwhelmed and killed by Titans, or the Giants.  

We saw a Virgin with fair eyes,  
Softer was she than the beam of morning;  
Her smile was as the rose in summer.  
She bathed our feet, she poured rich perfume  Over our hands and travel-soiled hair;  
And when we rested she gave us sweet wine  And cakes of honey richer than ambrosia.  
36 Thou shalt not worship any idol,  
Thou shalt not do any murder,  
Thou shalt not speak against the name of God,  Thou shalt not go after a married woman;  
Thou shalt not steal the goods of any,  
Thou shalt not do an unjust thing—  
These are six precepts which I heard in Heaven  From the Sacrosanct.  
37 Vain of men are offerings to the Winds  
On the altars at the mountain’s base;  
Vain the trenches which your priests dig,  
That they make evoke spirits to their magical songs.  Odious is the hand that wields the dart,  
That pierces the soft flesh of deer and hare:  But the water-lily brightens in the face  
Of him who spares life.  
38. O Son! let this truth be graven on thy soul with  adamantine pencil in living flame; that Virtue alone is  true happiness; and Vice is misery in all respects.  
39. All Vice is weak in its beginnings; but it grows  until it is too strong for a mighty man; then does it wax  shameless before God and Earth, so that there is no  crime without an apologist.  

40. In the name of God there is a great mystery: it  is not lawful to utter it except with holy purpose; in  the morning hour, before the sun rises, and after he  descends; before meals, and before repose.  
41. That spirit goeth unto God, whose works are  done for the sake of God; who esteemeth Him the Lord  Supreme; and himself His servant, and His alone.  
42. Beautiful and bright is the road that leads to  Heaven: a crystalline splendour of glory girds it round;  it is a paven way of glittering light; sunbeams circle it,  and stars illumine it with lustre. But the evil behold it  not; it is invisible to their gloomy eyes; it shines  majestically like the rainbow’s arch, but they behold  only darkness and a void.  
43. There is a Golden Fire in the Paradise land,  through which Pure Spirits pass at every revolution of  the sun; hence they grow everlastingly bright, and  glitter with the freshness of new flowers. But woe  unto that thoughtless one, who having lapsed even in  the least degree of thought, enters the heart of that  Golden Fire—he is ejected in agony and confusion.  
44. There is a Starry Fountain in the Heavens,*  where the Spirits of Beauty bathe: therein do they  renew their youth, their brightness, and all that is  divine. But woe unto that thoughtless one, who having  lapsed even in the least degree of thought, goes into that  Starry Fountain—it becomes to him a well of liquid fire.  
45. Man cannot make himself wholly-pure, though he  laboureth thereunto night and day; shall he then do  nothing, or sit despondent?—yea, this is to make himself  wholly impure.  
46. As the light that emanates from the sun diffuses  happiness and radiance, so the love that emanates from  God is the delight of the blessed in Paradise.  
47. The pure angels of God are such, that in one  breath they traverse the Sphere; they fly on lightning  pinions, whithersoever their will impels them.  
48. God loves to be veiled. He will not be seen by  the profane. He enfolds Himself in dazzling splendour.  Who is worthy to look upon Him? Eternal, Invisible,  All-presiding, He is cognizable by no sense of man: He  cannot be conceived even in the mind; He cannot be  comprehended by aught that exists.  
49. Everything that hath life cometh from Gඈൽ; even  from Him who is the Universal Parent; and every  living essence on the earth hath within it the fire of  everlasting life.  
50. There is another and a future Sphere, where all  the good shall live in sunbeams; there is another and a  future Sphere, where all the bad shall weep in desola tion.  
51 As the harmony dwells within the flute,  
Even so does the spirit unseen in the body;  
No man can see the music, yet it is there,  
Even so can no man see the spirit, yet it is there.  52. All spirits pass into other appearances, as soon as  death hath operated on their bodies; each taketh unto  itself that form of existence for which its habits and  aspirations have prepared it (9).  
53. Let not a son sit in the presence of his father  until he has received permission to do so; let not a wise  man receive a gift from the mean; there is pollution in  the gold of the sordid.  

54. Before the rising of the sun, let no common lan guage come from thy lips; but let thy thoughts meditate  in holy contemplation on Him who maketh the sun to  rise.  
55. Marriage is a sacred duty imposed on all; let no  strong man live in celibacy; happy is he who leaves  behind him a representative, to fulfil the works which he  has begun.  
56. Who is she that cometh not unto her husband’s  bed, a virgin, pure from all defilement? she shall be as  foul polluted water; she shall not be worthy of his  love.  
57. But the chaste wife is the honour of the family;  she who presents the children; the wife is the man’s  earthly soul; his half, his best friend, the source of all  his happiness.  
58. She, with her endearing conversation, is the friend  in solitude, the mother to the oppressed; a refreshment  of delight and comfort on the wearisome wilderness of  life.  
59. Beautiful are the hands of that woman who  weaves, who spins, who embroiders; who brings up her  offspring with mutual love and tenderness, guarding each  one as the apple of her eye.  
60 Reverence the Holy One,  
It is the first of all duties;  
It makes the heart pure;  

It restrains all evil passion.  
My son, revere the Mighty;  
Fear none but him who fears not God;  
There is no wisdom but in virtue;  
The chief of fools is the impious man.  
Whoso worships self, worships hell;  
But the worship of the Supreme is heaven;  
The wicked are in darkness;  
But to the pure there is an Asylum of Light;  Swear not by the Sacred Name;  
Nor give homage to the earthly;  
If thy spirit aspires not beyond the dust,  
Thy future shall be with the dust.  
Study also to know God;  
If thou know Him not, thou canst not know thyself;  If mortals knew what cometh after,  
They would shrink with terror from sin.  
God is a Shining Mirror,  
In which the Universe is imaged:  
Yea, and the smallest thing or sin in the Universe  Is reflected there in clear light.  


CHAPTER XVII.  
Now when I had uttered these words,  
I was borne upward in a Whirlwind;  
I was carried off westward;  
Many mysteries I beheld.  
A mountain of iron, a mountain of copper,  
A mountain of silver, a mountain of gold,  
A mountain of fluid metal,  
And a mountain of lead (10).  
And I enquired of the Lion, saying,  
What are these which in secret I see?  
As I spake a horror passed over him,  
As a land rent by an earthquake.  
And he said: Those things of which thou askest  Are laid up for One who shall come;  
Who shall hold command over thine earth,  
And break the thrones of emperors.  
Wait, and in a short time thou shalt know;  
Thou shalt read all as in a book written;  
The secret hour shall be revealed,  
The hour which God hath appointed.  
Gold or silver shall not avail,  
Nor an iron sword, nor a coat of brass,  
Nor copper, nor lead, nor metal,  
* The medal above is taken from Beger. It represents the sun crowned Buddha, who combines within himself the Messiah and  Cabir. In his right hand is the Olive Branch: this is the  Messianic symbol; in his left is the Spear: this is the Cabiric  symbol. S. C. is Sol-Cœlestis—the Heavenly or Spirit Sun.  

Though the wicked put their hope in these.  
But each one of these Mountains  
Shall be a slave to him who goeth:  
To make men acknowledge truth,  
And bow before the Word which he proclaims.  
O ye flame-girt Mountains,  
With ancient trees like dark gray hair;  
With streams like the white sea-foam,  
And glory breathing out of every pore.  
The Sun-Bulls of God within your dark cells  Dwell, like lightnings hidden;  
And many a Mighty Sage  
Meditates long over the Holy Mystic.  
Therefore is it meet that in your high presence  I should bow, and feel a solemn influence;  
From thy recesses mayhap may come  
One of the Emperors of earth.  
Here were the Amreeta Lakes—  
Whoso drinks shall shine for ever;  
But over their flow a Serpent watches:  
Terrible is his fate who approaches unworthily.  The Fountains change into devouring fires:  
The Serpent grows into a thousand forms:  
The sons of evil who come near the place  
Are stricken as if with plague:  
They recede into a Vale of Darkness,  
Impelled by violent blasts:  
They can no more taste these Holy Fountains,  Than could a mortal live in fire.  
O ye waves and waters of beauty,  
Gleaming like the white-footed of heaven:  

My soul rises to ye, even as ye rise:  
I long to be commingled with ye.  
Over your crests the Serpents glide,  
The fire-pinioned:  
They dip into your glowing beauty,  
And from the touch draw new loveliness.  
They arise clothed in thunders  
From the mighty Cauldrons of Flame:  
Oh! that I could bathe but one moment  
Within the bosom of your bright embrace.  
This hath the Lord of Heaven said:  
A day shall come when the Messenger shall be throned,  When the pure shall be crowned with mitres,  When they shall choose their own palaces.  Blessed are they who trust in me;  
Who have found their joy in the Father:  
The Chosen shall dwell amid them,  
As a Parent dwelleth with the children.  
I will adorn the glorious face of Heaven,  
So as to give them new delights:  
I will bless it, and clothe it in lustre  
Even for the sake of those Divine ones.  
The spheres of earth also will I change,  
Transforming them to light and loveliness;  That my children may look upon them  
With new enraptured appetite.  
The sacred ones of starry aspiration  
Shall dwell in Palaces of the Stars:  
But the iniquitous, the followers of satwânas,  Shall not see the renovated spheres.  
I have looked upon their daily lives;  

I see that they are as dead men;  
To the unthinking they appear to live:  
But to the wise they are already dead.  
As a corpse moveth not among the quick,  
So neither can he whose nature is sensual  
Abide amid the active essences,  
Or sojourn with moving Spirits of light.  
My son! hear the Statutes of the Lord God,  
The Statutes thou art commanded to fulfil;  
And ponder well upon the truths that I reveal;  Meditating upon them as the words of wisdom.  Thou wert born in thy body of the earth,  
And to the earth thy body shall descend;  
Thou shalt leave behind thee all that perishes,  Thou shalt carry with thee whatsoever is of heaven;  That which men of the earth covet dieth with them;  It passes away, and is no more beheld;  
But that which the Children of Heaven have garnered,  Passes with their spirits into the presence of God.  The seas, the mountains, and the forests,  
The stars, the sun and moon shall pass away:  But the deeds of a virtuous man shall never pass,  Their loveliness shall shine everlastingly. 

 
CHAPTER XVIII.  
Here also I looked upon certain Fountains,  
Enshrined deep within the fiery Columns of Heaven;  Which embraced, but did not scorch their cool beauty,  Neither did the waters prevail over the flame.  And in these Columns of Heaven I beheld fires,  Which fell in showers of lustre, ever and ever.  

But neither on high, nor did they sink into the Deep,  Nor did they descend to mingle with the Mists.  
And over these Fountains I perceived a Vast, which  had neither a firmament above it, as a shelter; nor solid  ground underneath it as a stay; neither was there water  near it, nor any winged thing.  
But all was wild, and desolate, and arid;  
An awful silent Wilderness of Vastation;  
Thick with mists, and black with vapours:  
Swept with cold and poisonous blasts.  
There did I behold Seven luminous Stars, like fire mountains, and like spirits entreating me; and the Eagle  said: This place, unto the end of all things, shall be the  prison-house of the fallen.  
For the Stars which roll headlong over fires,  Are the Spheres of those who do transgress;  Who have disdained the commandments of Gඈൽ,  And ascended not in due season.  
They sank still lower into a lower Deep;  
For all their thoughts were carnal;  
The earthly cannot live in Heaven:  
Nor can the heavenly bide on earth.  
Therefore is the Lord offended with these spirits;  They pass into the Spheres of Vastation;  
There shall they abide in winds and darkness,  Until the consummation in the Secret Year.  
And one of the Spirits said unto me: Wisdom is the  sole splendour; and all foolishness is darkness; and all  denial of the True is misery. Wisdom descended once to earth, but found no place whereon she could abide;  her dwelling therefore is in Heaven; yea, in the Heaven of heaven, Wisdom liveth. Wisdom went forth, in olden  days, to dwell among the sons of men; but she found  not even a roof-tree under which to shield her head.  Wisdom returned again heavenward, and seated herself  before God: He gave unto her a Throne beside himself;  She dwells with Angels of Beauty. Folly went forth,  and lighted on the earth, in the days after Wisdom left  it; she found a home with the sons of mortals; she  changed their pastures to a wilderness: there doth Folly  evermore remain: bright things have their home in  Heaven; the dark dwell in palaces on earth; so opposite  are the gods from men (11).  
Three Spirits, streams of pure light,  
Poured forth rays of sweetest song;  
They moved around a Mystic Vase,  
That glowed with fragrant incense.  
In the centre of Twelve Trees it stood,  
Burning like the Universal Mind:  
And fed by the divine springs  
That flowed from a Cloud of Lightnings.  
Whiter than the Morning Star were they;  
Beauteous as the Virgins of ocean:  
Their wings glistened with the sun-foam;  
Their forms were pillars of splendour.  
From thence I passed along into another place, terrible  with the operation of great fires; blazing, glittering more  fearfully than a comet; and in the midst thereof, a vast  division. Columns of Flame struggled to the end of  the Abyss; and deep was the Gulf into which they fell; but I could not see its extent or depth; neither  could I perceive the place where it began.  
Thunders pealed over those Wildernesses;  
The flame-winged lightnings flashed:  
Like the flight of spears in battle,  
Even so was their rapid brightness.  
I heard a song of sorrows,  
The wailing of despair and death:  
Lonely as the midnight wind  
Amid a thousand winding caves.  
Then did I cry out: How terrible is this spot! how  hard to explore are its recesses. Then one of the Spirits  who was with me answered thus unto my mind; Enoch,  why art thou alarmed at this place? why doth the vast 
ness of its torment scare thee? Lo! it hath been set  apart for evil doers, who have rebelled against all Truth:  herein do they abide while serving sin, because they  mocked the statutes of the Eternal; because they  bowed themselves in gloom unto the evil passions of their  nature.  
Then spake the Lion:—  
Stoop not thyself, O Son of Man!  
Unto the darkly-splendid baits of earth,  
For they will ensnare thy pure spirit,  
They will entangle it for ever in destruction.  But lift thyself upward to the Heaven of God,  The Paradise of Beauty where He dwells;  
Therein is no deceit found,  
But all is sunbright loveliness.  
Seek not the Darkness, O thou heir of heaven!

But hasten rather unto the ever-abiding Light  Which beams before the Divine Father,  
Who gave unto thee a spirit of reason.  
This spirit of light was given unto thee,  
A virgin clothed with the heavens;  
Take heed, I charge thee, that thou keep her pure,  That thou preserve her from all stain.  
Let her be free from worldliness and sin,  
As the snow upon the mountain-top;  
Let her venerate the Lord God  
And walk in His Holy Laws.  
As a harlot envieth a virgin,  
So do the iniquitous hate the good:  
They deck themselves in gold and silver,  
And wag their tongues against the pure of heart.  Every one of them hath given himself to gold:  He panteth after it with all his heart:  
Cold as a rock of ice, and hard,  
Is the inner nature of each one.  
Here also rose a great Mountain,  
With a narrow Valley at its base;  
But towards the ends dark winding plains,  
And rocks black and savage.  
In these out-spreading Wastes  
The Whirlwinds bind up their wings;  
They wake—they rise—they issue forth  
Like eagles ravening for food.  
And in the centre of these, stood a Tree:  
And I wondered much at the Valley and the Tree,  Then I asked: What means this Garden?  
And these Trees, and this misty Valley?  

And the Star-clothed answered, saying:  
This Valley is the Land of the Accursed;  
Here shall be collected all who blaspheme,  
Speaking of the Glorious in impious language:  Here shall they be finally gathered;  
Here shall be their accursed territory.  
They shall be as an example of divine justice:  To the pure, whose righteousness shall shine for ever.  
Tremble not! he said:  
But the coldness of ice stole over me:  
Oh! that I could hide myself,  
Beneath the covert of yonder cavern.  
Tremble not! he said:  
Thou, who art the Messenger:—  
Yet the ice of death was over me,  
As I saw those sights most terrible.  
The children of the dark clouds,  
Who lived in sin, who died in guilt—  
Hast thou more feeling for them than God?—  I was abashed—I died away in shame.  
Then did I question the Spirit:  
Why are they separated by these Fiery Zones?  And still their voices rose in accusation:  
And they wept in tears of blood.  
Then did he make answer: Three are the separations  that divide the pure from the unrighteous: the first, a  Gulf—a Chasm of Darkness; the second is an Ocean of  deep waters; the third, a Fire, which, like a fierce  meteor, shines ten thousand leagues above that Ocean.  For as on earth the dead are buried in graves, so as to be separated from living men, so here the wicked,  which are as fœtid corpses, are divided from the pure  and living. Thus separated, they abide in suffering;  everlastingly cursing one another: thus hath it been  from the beginning; and thus shall it continue unto  the end. In the Secret Day, their living essence shall  not suffer annihilation; neither shall they be able to  soar into Light. Their earthly nature drags them down.  But in this Gulf, and amid this Desert, which they  daily fabricate for themselves, they shall abide in the  Darkness of Slime; in the Darkness which they have  always loved. For as a bird cannot mount in air if it  shall have lost its light wings, neither can they ascend,  weighed down by sin, which hangs like lead upon their  souls. Behold! this is the Eternal Ordinance, the  Ordinance of Nature, Truth and Justice; the pure  shall rise unto the sun; the impure shall be for ever  clogged.  
But their abiding place is not here always;  
They are not chained for ever in darkness:  
An hour of liberation is for all;  
Then they issue forth, and assume form.  
They pass into spheres of life,  
For which they accord in temper:  
They take upon themselves a new development  In conformity with their real nature.  
A sunbeam of light—  
And behold, I was in another place:  
I heard the winds die away  
In a dream of forests and dark woodlands.  
A sparkling Sea of Fire and quivering brightness,
And in the vista a Dark Form;  
The Sovereign Lord, the Supreme Father,  
Covered with ten thousand veils of flashes:  
Did I see that venerable Form?  
I could not penetrate the Three Zones:  
The waters of a deluge seemed to cover me;  They whirled me along in darkness;  
Be not sad, O Messenger!  
Child of the two births:  
The sun-steeds cannot bear thee  
Beyond the roaring waves of yonder flame.  

The Third Psalm
 
O thou Supreme Being! Eternal, Ineffable, and In comprehensible, hearken unto thine humble child, who  longs to be conjoined with thee in spirit; Thou art the  All-Perfect, the Self-existent Fountain of all Existence;  Thou art thyself above all Essences, more beautiful in  thy lustre than all beauty; Thou art the Truth, but  more sublime than all Truth; Thou art the Wisdom, but  more exalted than all Wisdom; Thou art the Good, but  more excellent than all Goodness; for thou art the Principle and the First of all these. As the Sun is the prin ciple of light to the wandering spheres that revolve  around him, so art Thou unto all the Spirits that have  emanated from thy flame-bright centre. Omniscient,  Omnipresent, and All-Powerful, who is worthy to be  adored but Thou? Infinite thou art and comprehendest  all things, but art thyself incomprehensible by all. Thou  art the Giver of all goodness; Thou art the Source of all  that is divine; Thou art the Best of all that is most righteous in the heavenly Spheres which do revolve before  Thee. As the morning light upon the earth, so is thine  hallowed presence to the spirit. As the golden Vesper  Star, so is thy Sacred Aspect unto the spirit-eye. Thou  art the sole Creator; the Sovereign Ruler of the Universe; the Judge all-perfect and all-knowing who metest  out thine equity to the worm of the earth. Be thou  our only Guide and Guardian, who art the common  Parent of all; who bestowest all that is most excellent;  the sweetness of peace, the purity of innocence. Preserve us, Lord! that we may love Thee; Guide us,  Father! that we may walk in thy paths; ever aspiring  upward unto Thee as the flowers that grow heaven ward.  


CHAPTER XIX.  
God, by his Spirit, raised me up into a place  Where was the appearance of gleaming Fires;  And when they pleased they assumed the shapes of Men;  Men of majesty and heroic beauty.  
They bare me onwards to a lofty height;  
To a Mountain which reached the Empyrean:  There did I behold the Receptacles of Thunders  At the extremities of the place where the Gulf was  deepest,  
And each One had in his hand a bow of fire,  And arrows in the shining quiver;  
A sword of fire and armour of pure flame,  
And lightnings terrible in brightness.  
Then they lifted me to living Waters—  
Waters of Life—that spake audibly,  

And to a Flame which caught the setting of the sun,  And from which the Sun drew new blood.  I surveyed the Magnet which supports the World;  The Four Winds which bear up the corners of the earth;  Which flash and lighten like living spirits,  And wave amid the heavenly firmament.  
I beheld also Winds which live in the Empyrean,*  And how they rise between Heaven and Earth:  Great they were and armed with thunders,  Constituting the Pillars of the Universe.  
I saw the Winds also which make the skies revolve,  Which cause the Phantoms of Light to rise and set;  I saw the Winds which waft the clouds,  
Guiding them like ships in their paths. (12)  I saw the broadway of the Spirits of Light,  Paved with the brilliancy of ten thousand suns;  I perceived at the earth’s border the glittering cope  Extending far: a Veil star-studded.  
Then did I pass onward to the South,  
Where burnt Six Mountains formed of gems;  Three there were towards the East,  
And three stretched towards the South.  
Those towards the east were of a varied brightness,  And one was margarite and one opal;  
Those towards the South were scarlet in splendour;  The middle rose like a Throne of God.  
It was all one fair and lucid jasper—  
The highest peak was of clear sapphire;  
Beautiful in body like the radiant form  
Of the Supreme Lord—the Ruler of the Light.  * Symbols of the Cabiri.  

And over all like a curtain of fire  
A blazing light rolled in golden waves:  
In golden waves and starry billows it rolled  More gloriously divine than sunset.  
And there I looked upon a place of loveliness,  Where lucent waters were collected into Lakes,  Glittering over tracts of the angelic,  
Like the moon’s sphere in the purple.  
Lightnings flashed out of these Mountains;  
Their flames rose on high;  
The clouds brightened—the stars were seen;  Eagles of fire whirred and whirled around.  
Mystic Voices echoed on all sides;  
Worship God alone:  
He is the Holy One of Years;  
He is the Sole Ancient:  
AO, Amounm Oul-om
Osiris, Adonm Bel;   
O raiser of the mighty hymn,  
In the star-hour worship Him only.  


CHAPTER XX.  
There but afar off did I behold the King of Spirits,  Whose head was like the snows:  
And near Him stood another One  
Whose face resembled that of Man.  
His countenance was full of grace,  
As is the countenance of a Holy Spirit;  
In his hand he bare thunders;  
The lightnings flashed in his feet.  

Then I inquired of one of the Spirits,  
And I questioned about this Son of Man:  
Who he was? and whence he was?  
And why he was beside the Ancient of Days?  He made answer unto me, saying:  
This is a Son to whom truth belongs:  
In whose heart also wisdom dwelleth:  
He reveals hidden things.  
For the Lord of Spirits hath allowed unto him  The privilege of a high embassy:  
He is the Morning Star  
Whose advent is a source of joy.  
And this Son of Man on whom thou lookest  Shall raise up Kings from their beds;  
He shall awaken great ones on their thrones;  He shall curb the bridles of the haughty.  
He shall break the teeth of sinners;  
* These medals are taken from Beger. That on the right re presents the Holy Spirit giving the kiss of consecration in the  Caduceus, to the Serpent-Buddha: in that on the left she gives  him the Mystic Volume of Truth in the same form as that which  Assyrian Oannes holds in his hand. 

He shall cast down monarchs from their seats;  They who have refused to own a God;  
They who have disdained to humble themselves;  Upon the faces of giants he shall tread,  
Until they shall be filled with confusion;  
He shall trample, he shall cover them with shame;  They shall lie in a pit of dishonour.  
Darkness shall be their dwelling place;  
On scorpions shall be their bed:  
Neither shall they again rise up among men,  But shall be hidden away for ages.  
They honoured not the name of the Father:  
They blasphemed the Beautiful One;  
They lifted up their hands, and wagged their heads,  Against the High, the Holy One of Heaven.  They crushed their people to dust,  
And showed their iniquity to the sun:  
In evil only were they strong:  
And lo, it has deceived them to destruction;  Their faith also was in idols  
Made by the hands of slaves:  
They denied that Gඈൽ was Ruler;  
They expelled the Holy from their temples.  They persecuted those who remained faithful,  Who bare the Name within their hearts;  
But the prayer of the good and true  
Goes up unto the portals of the Lord.  
The blood of the righteous ascends from earth  Into the presence of the King of Spirits;  
It hath a voice, a never ceasing voice,  
That penetrates unto the Judge of all.  
The holy of the heavens meet together;  
 
They raise hymns of praise and supplication;  They call upon the sacred Lord of Justice  To look upon the blood of the slain,  
That the prayers of the pure may not be wind,  But may avail unto a salutary purpose;  That patience may not endure for ever.  Nor the wicked prevail over the good.  
From night we seemed to pass into dawn;  Its crystal beam shone over distant lakes:  Many beautiful ones floated on the waves,  Burnished as the Seraphim of varied light.  They were crowned with shining helmets;  
Their feet and shoulders bare wings;  They moved in happiness and beauty,  And sang amid the intermingling stars:  Follow, follow to the Primary Fountains,  And in their waves renew loveliness;  There are the springs of youth immortal,  Which the Dragons and the Eagles guard.  
Behold the Ancients of Days is on his Throne—  The Throne of Glory and of Light;  
Before him shall the Book be opened  Wherein are written the Supreme Laws.  And all the Splendours of the Heaven of God,  And all the Powers that be above the Heaven,  And all the Living Ones and Pure Intelligences  Shall stand around the Thrones of Judgment.  Then shall the hearts of the good rejoice  For the Day of Consummation hath arrived:  The prayer of the saints hath been heard;  The blood of the righteous hath not sued in vain.  

The march of guilt triumphant in its course  
Is stayed by a Hand of Lightnings:  
And the unchanging Institutes of God  
Pronounce the doom of the oppressor.  
Then shall arise the Fountain of Righteousness,  The Fountain from the Wells of Wisdom;  
The thirsty shall drink and enjoy knowledge;  They shall dwell with the paradise-ones.  
In that hour shall the Son of Man stand forth  Before the Shining Lord of Spirits:  
And his name shall be pronounced aloud  
In the presence of the Ancient of Days.  
Before the Sun and the Signs were ordained,  Or their courses were made for them;  
Before the Stars of Heaven were formed,  
Or Light heard a command,  
The Secret of the Son of Man was known  
In the heart of the Lord of Spirits.  
 * * * *  
 * * * *  
He shall be a support for all the righteous  
To lean upon him without stumbling;  
He shall be the Light of Nations  
And the hope of all who are in trouble.  
All who dwell on earth shall wait for him,  
And do the things that he ordains;  
They shall bless the Lord who sent him;  
They shall sing to the King of Spirits.  
Wouldest thou know his name?  
Soshiosh, the Saviour, is his name;  
His presence on the earth of man  

Is as the presence of Morning Light.  From God's presence did he go forth  A Messenger unto spheres of sorrow;  
He shall exist for ever when his work is done  He shall be in the presence of the Master,  He was concealed in God's splendour,  But he came forth from the Holy One,  To reveal the Institutes of the Spirit-Lord,  To those who pined in darkness.  
From the first he did exist in secret;  He was hidden—the Concealed One;  Not even to the Cherubic splendours  Was his mystic name known.  
He bears the Sceptre of Command;  
He bares the Sword of Conquest;  
Let the whole earth bow down;  
Its Pontiff and its Lord appears.  
In the days when this Apostle cometh  The kings and mighty ones of clay,  Who have gained their thrones by guilt,  Shall be abashed before the Divine Messenger.  
Who shall save their souls from death?  Who, but he, whose mission is of God?  Like hay in fire, and lead in water,  
Are the natures of the evil-hearted.  
They burn in the presence of the pure;  They sink down before the Holy ones;  Neither shall a tenth part of them be found  Or saved from the universal wreck.  The sword of the Lord of Spirits  

Shall be drunken with their impure blood;  
The Envoys shall bear them to punishment—  To the retribution due to guilt.  
Darkness gathered round us:  
Even the Starry Chair was lost in mist:  
Mists and clouds revolved like wheels;  
Hither, Fire and Water mingled.  
A Mountain-Cloud veiling every star  
Rose like a Whirlwind;  
Thunders rolled: lightnings glittered ;  
Yet still we passed along.  
Twelve Stones rising up like pillars  
I could discern amid the glancing fires:  
Girdled with walls of unhewn rock—  
On every stone the semblance of a Splendour.  


CHAPTER XXI.  
And after these things I was transfused;  
Ascending far into the Heavens  
I beheld the sons of the Celestial Spheres  
Treading gloriously on flames of fire.  
Their garments were of pure white;  
Their faces were transparent amber;  
I saw two Rivers of Fire glittering like hyacinth,  And I fell on my face before the Lord of Spirits.  And one of the Star-clothed took me by the hand;  He raised me up—he brought me to the Mercy-Seat—  He showed me all the hidden mysteries:  
The receptacles of the Stars, their fiery splendours.  The light wherein they did go forth in flame,  
 
From before the faces of the Divine,  
And he concealed me in the Morning Star.*  After that I beheld in a Vision of Light  
A palace raised with stones of diamond;  
And in the midst of the eye-dazzling stones  
I beheld tongues of living flame.  
And as I looked upon the orbit of this House of Fire  I saw at one of its extremities  
That there were Rivers full of flaming fires  
Which ran around encircling it on all sides.  
After this I saw another Heaven;  
A paradise of multiform mansions;  
And the divisions of a Celestial City,  
And an order of Spirits different from the others.  I saw the measure of all human actions  
As they are judged by the wise and pure:  
Differing much from the standard of the unwise,  As it is set up as a guide to mortals.  
I saw also Palaces of the Pure Intelligences,  Ever-flashing Halls and Temples;  
Beauty that cannot be described;  
Glory that cannot be painted.  
From thence I went towards the extremities of the  Sphere; there saw I many Living Creatures, they  were unlike aught I had ever seen, and each was  different from the other. And winged Shapes vari 
ous in their forms, and with a voice of many changing melodies; and they dwelt around silver waterfalls; Mystic  were the echoes in that region. And looking eastward  I perceived the boundaries of this vast and flame-girt  Flower-sphere; impassable oceans of rolling light, unto  which the Gardens of Heaven extended not. The Gates  of Heaven stood wide open; I saw the Stars come forth;  I numbered the Celestial Ministers as they issued from  the vast portal. I wrote them down according to their  order—their names also did I record; I marked their  times and seasons while the Children of Paradise waved  their wings. The Spirits who were with me named them;  hailing each new Splendour by his title; mighty they  were; their works were mighty; they were Messengers  whom God sends forth. From thence I advanced onwards  in a mist of fire unto the North, to the terrestrial points  of this immense Sphere, where I beheld a glorious won der. For there I saw the Heavenly Gates which lead  direct unto the Celestial; immense in fearful magnitude  and beauty; the ever-flashing lightnings wreathed them.  Three of them were open and distinctly marked; from  these tempests did rush forth, bearing on wings of dark ness, cold and hail, and frost and snow: Dew also, and  rains they carried, and the flame of a fierce fire which  blew violently from those haughty Gates upon all terres trial things. They swept them headlong into ruin; the  Wind Sendo was there; dreadful with fiery whirling  wings, as the collected force of many tempests. Nothing  of a sensual or carnal nature, such as the Children of  Sin are, could stem that irresistible torrent:—they were  hurled headlong into Wildernesses.

* The hierophants at the close of their sacred ceremonies in  the Mysteries, in allusion to this, exclaimed: We have found him  (the Messenger) Concealed in the embraces of the Sun. Landseer’s  Sabæan Res. 196.  
  
But the Children of Purity felt it not;  
They passed through the Cataract of Flame,  Gliding with an easy motion  
As fishes glide through billows.  
From this place I wandered on to the extremities of  the Sphere westward, wherein also I did behold Three  Heavenly Gates open. They were as those which I had  before seen beaming like suns in the far north, and from  these also a rushing Ocean of winds and wonders flashed.  Then we went onward unto another region, where I saw  in the West a Holy Mountain; a strong Mountain and a  vast, and four delightful places like Gardens. Internally  it was deep, broad, and smooth, as if it had been shaped  by a heavenly hand; it was great and beautiful to look  upon, and my heart melted away. And the Lion-Spirit  who was with me said: These are dwellings of the  Pure in Heart; for such were they made; here shall they  be gathered; these bowers shall be their’s until the Secret  Day.  
From these depths of fire I speak unto mortals,  And from the heart of glowing streams:  
Beautiful are the strains I hear;  
I seek to waft their echoes unto earth.  
O men! venerate God:  
He alone is worthy of supreme devotion;  
In his mighty hand He wields  
The vast unbounded starry Universe.  
He holds the measuring line;  
The sun beams out of His eyes;  
The whitely-foaming sea is His;  
The winds come and go as He commands.  
His song goes forth over the Kosmos;  
 
It is the great Song of Songs;  
Blessed are they who in the blasts and storms  Hear and recognise that mystic melody.  
All would perish were He not near;  
He it is who guides the Wanderer:  
Who rules it by the shining kings of night:  
Who holds it by the golden lord of day.  
Blessed be this Great and Holy One,  
Unto the everlasting age of ages;  
Let all the living, all the dead,  
Bow down and join in worship of His Name.  

CHAPTER XXII.  
Many are the Mansions in the kingdom of Heaven—  Celestial spheres more gorgeous than the sun,  Wherein the Spirits of Divine Love dwell  
As thou mayest see the fruits upon a spreading tree.  And there are angelical Spheres of Light  
More radiant than the rainbow’s orb,  
Wherein the loveliness of God is felt  
By all who are the inhabitants thereof,  
And into these ascend the Spirits of men  
Who pass from earth in purity and truth;  
Who have aspired after the Wisdom of God,  And clothed their souls in wisdom.  
Man when first he passeth out of human life  Awakens as if from clouded dream;  
A glory of celestial splendour surrounds him;  He dreams that he is in a Vision of Beauty.  
But opening his eyes, and stretching forth his limbs,  He finds that he is a living spirit;  
He sees his soul around him like a garment,  But he is wholly destitute of the corporeal body.  And he is sorely troubled and affrighted;  He knows not whither he is going;  
He floats through an ethereal ocean;  
He feels himself wafted on a wind.  
But lifting up his ever pure thoughts  
To the Most High God of his adoration,  Who hath been unto him while in the flesh  His Father, his Comforter, his Guide,  
He becomes filled with a heavenly peace.  He perceives a harmony in all his sensations;  His soul and spirit glide like a musical hymn  Through a sea of sparkling bliss.  
Then does he look upon all surrounding objects;  He sees them distinctly in their pure light,  Revealed in sun and star-shine  
Like the flashing gleams of the firmament.  And ever and ever as the celestial splendours  Beam from above, brightly and more bright,  And his chaste thoughts are uplifted to his Father,  The High, the Holy, and the Divine;  
He beholdeth around him, like a circle of sunbeams,  A beautiful Choir of Sacred Spirits,  
From whose most glowing presence is effused  A perfume sweeter than violets.  
Spirits of Love,  
Spirits of Truth,  
Spirits of Knowledge,  
Spirits of Wisdom,  
Spirits of Charity,  
Spirits of Pureness,  

Spirits of Light, and  Spirits of God.  


From these transcendent forms is poured forth  A radiancy so divine and dazzling  
That it outshines the eyes of the sun  
When they glow with hottest beam.  
And these Spirits by their celestial nature  
Behold the very essence of the Man:  
They penetrate the recesses of his inward thought;  They know at a glance all his desires.  
And unto these, according to their properties,  The blessed Spirits incline themselves:  
For the Spirits of Love conjoin with him  
Whose spirit hath ever been founded in love;  And the Spirits of Truth conjoin with him  
Whose spirit hath ever been founded in truth:  And the Spirits of Charity welcome him,  
Whose spirit hath ever been founded in charity.  For like seeketh its like in Heaven,  
Even as like seeketh its like on earth;  
And the pure avoid the opposite to purity  
In the celestial as well as in the terrene spheres.  Therefore, whatsoever virtue man soweth  
In his frail and transitory life of clay,  
The same reapeth he a thousand fold  
When he transmigrates into the heavenly life.  For the mystic sympathy which pervades the Universe  Immediately unites him to those that he resembles;  And the antipathy that exists between light and its  opposite  
Detaches him from aught that is not in unison with his  desires.  

And all the dwellers in those Blessed Places  Participate in the beatitude of the newly-come;  Perceiving an increase in their own happiness  By the happiness of this new member of their Circle.  Then do the Spirits ascend into a glorious Paradise;  There are Trees of an everlasting loveliness  Green and lofty and widely spreading;  
Flowering with many thousand blossoms.  And there are Bowers of delicious verdure,  And herbage fragrant with the breath of morning;  And Fountains purer than the crystal spar,  Flow in melody around those Trees;  
And Choirs innumerable of Angelic Spirits  Brighter than light glide amid the Paradise;  Breathing music, effusing beauty,  
And linked like starry constellations.  
A thousand rainbows glitter in the firmaments  And display their many-shining colours:  Lightnings vibrate along the ground,  
Like streams of running water.  
The mansions in this Heavenly Land  
Gleam with many treasures;  
They are made of precious stones;  
They are encrusted with golden flowers.  They are ceiled and paved with diamond  That glitters with sun-form irradiations,  
Which change a thousand times a minute  More splendid than the auroral light.  
The loveliness of these Celestial Palaces  Is in harmony with the loveliness of the Spirits,  Who in purity abide therein,  
Aspiring ever after more seraphic places.
For as Virtue is the most beautiful of all things,  The transcendant Image of God himself;  
Therefore is it agreeable to the Laws of Justice  That these mansions should be worthy of the Spirits.  Thus are the Palaces of Paradise magnificent,  And not a void and vacant atmosphere;  
For the dwellings of the Heavenly-beautiful  Are like themselves heavenly-beautiful also.  Think not that Spirits wander at random,  
As some do heedlessly suppose,  
Flying through the vast and empty air  
For no fixed purpose, and with no-certain home.  But this, indeed, is not the condition of the Blessed;  Their palaces are majestic structures;  
They have Gardens, Rivers, and Fountains,  
And all things are in harmony with their greatness.  And some are of a snow-white diamond like Truth,  And some of a transparent emerald like Wisdom;  For the god-like dwell in god-like places  
Whose brightness is a symbol of the indweller.  
Thus the Intelligences of the Supercelestial  
Know at a glance the properties of the inhabitants,  By the star-bright aspect of their homes,  
And the appearances that correspond therewith.  And even so in like manner  
The habitations of the wicked correspond with the  wicked;  
For fallen spirits congregate together  
According to their various tempers and qualities.  Thence emerging in the Cyclic Period  
They become again conjoined with souls and bodies, 

Passing into spheres of existence  
From which they must arise, or lapse lower still.  But many are the years of their wanderings  Before they are united with the psychical form;  Therefore the sat-wânas herd together  
In chaotic places, without a glimmer of light.  For as vice is the most detestable of all things:  Delighting in blood and filthiness and falsehood;  Hating all light, and burrowing in darkness,  And odious in its conceptions and designs;  Even so are the mansions of the sat-wânas  Wholly analogous to their evil properties,  And here they are like clouds of dust;  
Destitute of all power, or strength, or vigourousness.  The Universal Law of God,  
That like shall follow after like;  
Extends itself into those regions  
Which assimilate themselves to their inhabitants.  For no gleam of light shines there,  
But all is mist and gloom perpetually,  
Consonant with the qualities of the wicked,  Whose minds are nests of scorpions.  
And as the consciences of wicked men on earth  Present before them dreadful phantoms,  And terrible shapes, and fantasies, and forms,  Arise from the fumes of their guiltiness;  Haunting them in sleep and in the twilight hour  With many threatening shapes and gestures;  The offspring of a gloomy imagination  
That fears yet cleaves to its illusion  
Even so in these chaotic places  
The conscience-stricken wanderers of sin
Generate for themselves evil sights and appearances,  Corresponding to the sinfulness of their natures.  These appearances exist not in reality;  
For God creates no monsters;  
But unto the disordered minds of the fallen  
They appear in the vividness of life.  
This is the state of that which is called HELL;  Which God, indeed, hath not formed;  
Neither banisheth He his spirits thereunto;  
But their evil tendencies gather them together;  And their evil natures generating dreams  
Horrible and dark, and breathing torture,  
Surround them with the most lacerating agonies,  Not less terrible because self-inflicted.  
These sat-wânas are wholly without power;  They are confined within their own spheres;  Neither can any one arise therefrom  
Until the Cycle hath rolled through its years.  Then they assume souls or bodies,  
And are again developed in existence,  
To raise themselves, or plunge again  
Into the ocean of their self-made darkness.
  
CHAPTER XXIII.  
From thence I went into another place  
Far towards the West, near the end of the Sphere:  There did I behold a fire blazing:  
A rolling burning Torrent of Flames.  
It ceased not in its course by day,  
Nor did the night stay its mighty current,  
But ever like the ocean stream it flowed;  

And its roar was as the roar of an elephant.  
Then did I enquire, saying:  
What is this which ceases not?  
And one of the Holy Spirits answered,  
Whispering low into mine ear:  
This fire which runs for ever to the west  
Is the fontal fire of the Luminaries of Heaven;  They drink its brightness and are renewed;  
They feed on ever-flashing flame.  
I went from thence into another region,*  
And saw a Mountain from which fire flowed,  Ever burning, never ceasing;  
The skies were lightened by its splendours.  
I went near, and saw Seven other Mountains,  Each different from each in grandeur,  
Of brilliant gems, beautiful and precious,  
All magnificent and gorgeous to the eye.  
These Mountains rose in the eastern quarter,  Piled like clouds, one upon the other;  
Three Mountains uplifted themselves to the south,  Welded together in a similar manner.  
Deep valleys wound their way between,  
Separated by limpid rivers;  
And the Mountain of Fire was in the midst;  
And all were as the arch of a throne.  
Odoriferous trees grew thickly over them;  
And there was One Tree of divine fragrance;  Nor was there in the whole Paradise-Garden  A perfumed Tree which smelt like this.  
* See Vol. I. 215. On a pillar at Somnauth was inscribed:  This place resembles the Holy Mountain. Bombay Transactions  ii. 20. Som-Naut is Sun-God.  

Its leaf, its flower, its bark never withered.  
Its fruit was beautiful as the stars,  
And gathered like the clustering palm,  
Which welcomes the desert wanderer.  
Its leaves were emeralds set in gold;  
Its fruit was honey-wine and roses.  
Looking upon it, I cried aloud:  
How goodly is this blooming Tree!  
Then did one of the Spirits say,  
Why art thou delighted with this Tree?  
And why art thou inquisitive to know it?  
Thou hast passed by many things without enquiry,  But this has roused thy wonder.  
Then did I reply, saying:  
Concerning all things I desire knowledge,  
But most of all concerning this Tree,  
Whose beauty is more blooming than the Sun.  He answered, saying: Yonder Mountain,  
Whose peaks are like the Thrones of God,  
Shall be the Seat whereon shall sit the Holy One  When he shall arise to visit the earths.  
And that Tree of an exquisite fragrance,  
Breathing not a breath of carnal odour,  
Shall not be touched of any until the Secret Day,  When it shall be given to the Sons of Heaven;  Its essence shall be bestowed upon the Blessed;  For spirit-life within this Holy Place  
Shall flower for ever as in a Garden,  
Planted northward, unto the King of Heaven,  The Lord of Life and Beauty everlasting.  
Then shall they greatly rejoice in the Holy One;  An odour of delight shall pass through them;  

They shall exist in a life of light,  
Nor shall sorrow darken their days.  
And I blessed the Lord, Eternal in the Heavens,  Because He had prepared this Paradise Tree,  To give it to the Beautiful as their food,  
When He shall reveal himself in pure light.  
O man! what is the end of all thy labour, and all thy  trouble after gold and treasures? a short and transitory  and vain enjoyment; and then, thou art snatched from  them for ever. Would the wise man toil for prizes such  as these? achieved by great labour, and when achieved  laid down; would he link his spirit and body to corruption, for things that endure but for a brief moment? But  thou—uplift thy thoughts above the fading earth; con template in sublime dream the God of Heaven; prepare  thy spirit for its future existence, when it hath wakened  from the swoon of mortality. The term of thine exist ence approaches fast, and death, the end of all things, is  close at hand; awake! arise! before the final blow be  struck, for in the grave there is no hope. The most  exquisite delight of worldly enjoyment is like a draught  of sea-water to the thirsty; but the calmly-flowing hap piness of Eternity may be thine if thou wilt live a Child  of God.  
O God, thou art a great mystery;  
Yet still shall I adore Thee alone;  
Unto Thee my spirit turns,  
Whitely-shining amid the fire.  
The bright gleam of thy Glory lights the Universe,  All other lights are but shadows.  
Thy Voice sounds, and like a mighty trumpet
Its godlike energy commands the All.  
Look upon this Æthereal Tree, he said, once more,  Its flowers of pure gold in the rustling air;  
Its blossoms lovely as the moon,  
Its branches like clear crystal.  
Hearken! as its leaves sing  
Like harp-strings gently touched by the wind;  Beams of fire flash out of its trunk,  
And glide around its gnarled roots.  
Oh! how blessed of God are they  
Who dwell for ever in the shade of this Tree,  And sing and dance within its circle,  
And pour the hymn of praise.  
Illusion clouds them not;  
Nor does the mist of doubt assail them;  
The Holy shine on them with faces of love;  They breathe in most serene light.  

CHAPTER XXIV.  
From thence I proceeded to the middle Sphere, and I  beheld a happy and fertile Garden; the trees continually  sprouted new branches, and clustering wreaths of deli cious fruitage. There I saw a Sacred Mountain, and  under it, on the east, were Sweet Waters, which flowed  like light unto the golden-coloured south, making in their  course divine melody. I saw also in the east another  Mountain, tall and stately as the first; it rose into the  flashing sky, like a minaret of God’s house. Between  both were deep Valleys, through which also waters  flowed, onward ever unto the western side, where they  blended in one mighty Lake.  

White as the foam of seas,  
I saw the waving wings of Cherubim;  
Their feet were clothed in thunders;  
And so they rolled in light.  
The Seven in darkly-blue chain  
Passed, and reared their shining spears;  
They gleamed, they flashed, like flowers in lakes;  The war-cloud covered them.  
Mighty were they who passed,  
They carried stars like torches;  
Their robes glittered like the sea-waves  
When the full splendour of the sun illuminates them.  But on their thighs were golden swords,  And on their heads were helmets of diamond;  They shone like the wandering lights of the north,  The mystic, the inexplicable flashers.  
Thence I proceeded southward in my flight  To the extremities of this mighty Sphere;  There also I beheld Three Heavenly Gates;  Their stupendous portals were wide open.  Blazing torrents rushed through them,  
With rapid flight, as if in fear;  
And out of every leaping eddy  
Flashes of lightning gleamed.  
Thence also I proceeded quick  
To the extremities of the Sphere outwards;  There were three Heavenly Gates  
Wide open unto the Orient.  
Within them I saw three smaller Gates  
Of an exquisite and perfect beauty;  
Through these Spirits of Heaven passed,  
Proceeding by a path which they alone saw.  They were brighter than stars in their light;  
They were resplendent as pure morning air;  And when I saw them, I adored Gඈൽ  
For the Celestial Vision which He shewed.  
Every time I saw them, my heart panted  
With a rapture of thanks to the Lord of Glory,  Who had formed these splendid signs,  
That they might shew the magnitude of His works.  That all in heaven and under heaven  
Might know and glorify His creations;  
That all who do behold His power  
May ever bless His Holy Name.
  
CHAPTER XXV.  
After these things I was alone:—  
Alone amid those flaming orbs,  
I was rapt in mystic thought,  
As I floated in a sea of stars;  
Then I saw an Angel of brightness  
Whose glory exceeded that of the sun.  
He came and seized me by the hand.  
And I said, Who art thou? and what is thy name?  and he said, Rise up. And I said, Whither wilt thou  cause me to ascend? And he said, When I have shewn  thee Visions, then thou shalt understand who I am.  From the Seventh Heaven above the sun have I  descended unto this sphere, that I may raise thee before  the faces of Him whom the Universe delights to look  upon. Then we arose into the Ether. We saw the dwellers of that place: in many things it corresponded  with the earth of mortals; for all that is beneath is a coun terpart of what is on high. Then we arose farther into the  first Heaven; there I beheld a Throne in the midst, and  Spirits were upon the right hand and the left; and they  glorified him who sat upon the Throne.  
And I looked, if I could behold any sitting there,  But a Splendour of Light was over and about it,  And I could not see any form,  
But I heard the music of those who glorified.  Then I said unto the Angel,  
To whom is this praise addressed?  
He answered, To the Splendour who is in the Seventh  Heaven;  
He is here, but He is not visible;  
And also to the Beloved One,  
Who hath sent me unto thee.  
Then he raised me higher still,  
Into the second Heaven,  
Separated from the first Heaven,  
As far as the earth also is separated from it.  
There I beheld a Throne;  
Beautiful spirits were on the right and on the left;  And a Splendour dazzling to behold  
Wrapped the Throne in star-clouds.  
Great was the majesty of the second Heaven,  And the splendour of its angels ten-fold.  
And I fell upon my face to worship the Splendour;  But the Angel suffered me not, saying:  
Worship not the Visible,  
Nor the Throne, though of celestial brightness; 
Reserve thy homage for Him alone  
Whom thou shalt see in the time to come.  
For above all the heavens and their angels  
That Throne is placed;  
There is its Veil and Crown:  
These with thine eyes thou shalt behold.  
Think not that thou shalt not see Him face to face,  For they who love Him rise up in His presence;  The Holy Spirit, the Loved One, beareth them  Even in her bosom before the Supreme Lord.  Then he raised me higher still  
Into the third Heaven of all-beauteous light;  There also were innumerable Angels  
Upon the right hand and upon the left.  
They raised hymns of praise  
Before the Lord of Beauty, whom they worshipped;  Invisible was He amid the Splendour;  
I saw only Light immeasurable.  
No record of earthly things,  
No remembrance of the bodily is there;  
It is a pure Heaven of chrysolite:  
It is a world of immortal splendours.  
Then did he say unto me:  
When thou shalt have come into the Seventh Heaven  There shalt thou know that there is nothing hidden  From the Thrones and the Celestial Messengers.  Then he uplifted me upward still  
Until we stood in the fourth Heaven of the sphere;  It was far above the third Heaven,  
As the first was far above the earth.  
There also I saw divine ones  
Upon the right and left of the Throne;  

They sang, they glorified the Invisible Presence  Who veiled the Throne in glory.  
After that he uplifted me into the fifth Heaven,  The Angels were more beautiful than all the others,  But the Splendour on the Throne exceeded that of the  Angels,  
As much as they exceeded mere men.  
Then did I glorify Him who hath no name,  
The Almighty in the high Heavens,  
Who transmits His Glory from Heaven to Heaven,  Clothing His angels in splendour.  
Then he raised me into the sixth Heaven,  
Where I saw an ether brightest of all;  
The radiance that was in the Heaven I had last seen  Was night compared with this.  
Here the angels shine with lustre;  
A holy Splendour and a Throne also was here;  I said unto the Angel who conducted me,  
What is this which I behold, my Lord?  
He answered and said, I am not thy Lord,  
I am a Spirit like thyself,  
Appointed to conduct thee unto these places,  That thou mightest behold the Majesty of the King.  For beyond this place lives He who is never named,  With His Spirit, whose name is unrevealed;  With His Messenger who goeth forth,  
And of whom the Universe knoweth not.  
God alone is thy Lord,  
His Voice, the Heavens, the Powers do obey;  Thou shalt see Him visibly before thee,  
In the midst of His Heavens and His Thrones.  When from the mortal body which thou bearest  
 
Thou shalt ascend in spirit before Him,  
Then shalt thou assume bright raiment;  
Then shalt thou be like the Messengers.  
And I glorified God there, with his Spirits;  
Amid a radiant atmosphere of splendours:  
Yea, even the brilliancy of the five Heavens  Was as darkness to the brilliancy of this.  
Then he raised me unto the Seventh Heaven (13),  And I heard a Voice which froze my soul:  
Whither would the dweller among strangers ascend?  And I feared and trembled greatly.  
And while I trembled, lo! another mighty Voice;  It said: It is permitted that he ascend;  
Then we went into the Seventh Heaven,  
Where I saw spirits in the paradise splendour.  There were all the Holy Ones of God,  
Spirits, unclothed in flesh.  
I viewed them in their celestial garments,  
Assembled in splendour and divineness.  
And while I was yet gazing upon them,  
One of the beautiful Spirits who was a-nigh  Came unto me and shewed me Books,  
But they were not as the books of men.  
And he opened the Books before me,  
And they contained writings, but unlike the writings of  earth.  
And he read the Institutes of Heavenly Truth,  And the records of holy things.  
Then I beheld One standing,  
Whose glory exceeded the glory of all the others;  And all the saints and spirits of the place  
Advanced towards this One reverent with awe.    
Then this One became changed, and appeared like a  Divine Being.  
And the angel said, Venerate!  
And I venerated, and beheld the type  
Of many wonderful things revealed.  
And while I venerated this Spirit,  
Behold, I saw another Glorious Being,  
More beautiful and divine than the first,  
Whose glory suffered no transfiguration.  
And all the Angels approached and worshipped,  And venerated not the first Spirit, when the Lord was  nigh.  
A Cloud of Radiance was interposed,  
Through which my dazzled eyes beheld:  
Had I seen the Lord of Brightness,  
My spirit itself had been consumed.  
Then on my face I fell, and worshipped,  
For this was as the Supreme.  
Seventy thousand Veils He wore,  
To hide the brightness of seventy thousand suns.  And lo, an Ocean of Light:  
And he said to me, Who is this  
That sitteth on the right of God?  
And I answered, Sir, thou knowest.  
Then he, This is the Beloved,  
This is the Holy Spirit,  
Who speaks in thee and in the Prophets,  
Queen of the Ocean of Light.  
But on the left a Spirit standing,  
Clothed as a Son of Thunders:  
And I said unto the Angel, Who is he?  
And he said, It is the MESSENGER.  

Then mine eyes were opened,  
And I beheld a most Mysterious Glory.  
Darkness from excess of Light  
Seized and drowned my understanding.  
And I heard the tongues of thousand thousands  Glorifying, venerating, and chaunting Him,  Whose presence was too bright for me to behold,  Whose effulgence had stricken me blind (14).  And the hymns ascend from the six Heavens  Into this the Seventh Heaven of the Most High;  And I knew then why they sang around the Thrones,  Whose Splendour was an invisible Mystery.  And the Angel said, This Messenger of God  Hath received great exaltation (15);  
He is clothed by the Holy Spirit,  
And proclaimed through the mouths of the Divine Ones.  And I heard a Voice of music  
Say unto this Messenger;  
Go, descend through all the Heavens,  
And through the firmament of spheres descend.  Assimilate thyself in appearance unto all  
Who abide in the Heavens and the Circles,  
And go down upon earth,  
And free it from the fetters of darkness.  
Thus the Voice spake.  
And immediately we descended into the sixth Heaven,  And to the fifth, and to the fourth, and to all the  others,  
And so downwards through a multitude of Circles.  But whithersoever we came, the dwellers in the place  Recognized not the Messenger of God;  
They believed him to be as one with themselves (16),  
For he assumed the forms that belong to the various  spheres;  
And he passed into the Elemental Circles,  
And into the firmament, and so upon earth;  
And he took the appearance of a Man upon him,  And was believed by men to be one of themselves.  And he lived upon earth, and announced the Message;  And he passed away from earth, and ascended;  And the Spirits of the Firmaments and the Elemental  Circles  
Saw him pass, but with unchanged aspect.  
And they venerated him, saying:—  
How hath he descended, and we saw him not?  And how hath he passed, and we discovered not the  splendour  
Wherewith the Lord had clothed him?  
And he ascended through the innumerable Spheres,  And through the various Heavens of Paradise;  And they wondered, saying, How hath he descended?  And how knew we not the Messenger of Heaven?  And when he ascended into the Seventh Heaven,  He came unto the Great Glory,  
And of the Holy Spirit was received with gladness,  For he had done the message of the Most High.  And to me the Angel said, Great are these things  Which now have been made manifest to thee.  Thou hast seen and known secrets  
Which have been kept from the children of men.  Return unto thy mortal place  
Until the days of thy journey are accomplished.  Then shalt thou return hither,  
Worthily performing thy sacred purpose.  

CHAPTER XXVI.  
1. And he said: Who will go? and I saw a Vision  (17)  
2. A Virgin more beautiful in her light and youth  than the illuminated circle of the heavens when it shines  in all the radiance of the stars.  
3. Winged was this Virgin, and clothed to the foot;  but her snow-white wings were glorified with the stars of  heaven.  
4. In her right hand was the palm branch; in her left  a mystic wand; she floated in purple light.  
5. And he said: Behold: and I saw another Vision.  We passed as it were from the gloom of night  Into the resplendent lustre of the morning;  
The golden clouds rolled in waves of glory—  Each seemed to carry a star in its breast.  
And sweet voices sang divine songs,  
And soft sounds descended like summer rain,  And out of a Cave hidden in deep recesses  
We heard archangelic hymns.  
6. And again he said, Behold, and the Vision passed.  The first was as a Man standing in the heaven; his left  arm was extended; in his right was a crook, and in his  hand were many stars.  
7. And after him appeared another Man; he wore the  starry robe and diadem of a king, and in his right hand  a whip.  
8. And there shone a third unclothed like Truth,  and in his hands a mighty starry serpent. And all the heaven was made splendid by the apparition of the  Man.  
9. And the fourth was as a Hero; his splendour was  that of an Archangel; he knelt; he bare arrows, and in  his right hand a club; with his left he crushed the three headed.  
10. And the fifth was in the strength of youth and  power. In his right hand a sacred scythe; in the left a  snaky head. His feet were winged; he sprang like light  through heaven. A glory of splendour illuminated every  limb.  
11. And there shone a sixth, the offspring of Phen.  He stood in heaven in cruciform shape; his air was  grave.  
12. After him I saw a terrible one; half man, half  horse. He strained a bow; he drew a mighty arrow. The  clouds rolled back in terror.  
13. Next I saw starry Twins; their brows, their  shoulders, and their limbs were gemmed with stars; one  held a harp; the other arrows.  
14. And I saw another, a terrible one; he also had  the head and front of Man; but the legs and body of a  war-horse. And he marched as a Conqueror. And he  was surrounded with light.  
15. And the eleventh was a Man of War; with mace  and shield and breast-plate; a starry giant. His belt was  splendour.  
16. And the Twelfth was as a youth, and on his brow  a star; his body and his limbs were radiant. And he  held an Urn reversed, and a stream of starry lustre was  poured out of the Urn down over the earth. And the  number of his glories was twelve times nine.   
17. And he said unto me, Twelve; and again he said:  Ten. And again he said: Light, Glory, Life. And I  heard a Song from Heaven; but I was lost in a sea of  mystery.  
O Sun-born! look thou upon this tablet;—  
It glittered with flashes of light;  
Twilight settled on its pages;  
Darkness was around it in clouds;  
I saw a Sceptre of Beauty;  
It waved like a beautiful palm tree;  
I saw an Arm of Might;  
Death followed its descent.  
Again a Cloud passed over me  
Glittering even as crystal,  
And the solar spirits of heaven  
Sang, as it were, a new song.  
Thou art fairer than the children of men,  
* In the Medal above the Holy Spirit is on the Golden Seat;  she holds in her hand the eight-pointed cross of the Buddhists,  the Manichæans, and the Mazonic Templars: an emblem which  proves that their esoteric creed was one and the same. It appears  in Beger. The Serpent is the Messenger.  

Grace is poured into thy lips:  
Therefore God hath blessed thee for ever.  
Gird thy sword upon thy thigh,  
O most mighty,  
In thy majesty; in thy power.  
In thy glory ride prosperously,  
Because of truth, and meekness, and judgment;  Thy right hand teacheth thee terrible things.  
Thine arrows are sharp,  
Sharp in the hearts of thine enemies;  
The multitudes fall beneath thee.  
Thy throne, O king, is for ever;  
Thy sceptre of thy kingdom;  
It is a hallowed sceptre.  
Thou lovest righteousness;  
Thou dost abhor iniquity;  
Therefore hath thy God anointed thee.  
All thy garments smell of myrrh,  
Aloes and cassia out of the ivory palaces,  
In these have they made thee beautiful.  
And I looked and saw an Army of Chariots,*  And men rode in them,  
And they came upon the wind from the East,  From the West also, and from the South.  
The sound of the noise of their chariots was heard;  
* This is the Cabir Progress through Heaven. The Medal re presents God sustaining the Holy Spirit, who offers the Crown  of Heaven to the Cabiric Daimon. See Part I, 601.  

The saints who were on earth perceived it;  
The pillar of the earth shook from its foundations;  The roaring was heard from earth even unto heaven.  
In their wheels was whirlwind,  
They moved along in thunders;  
As the roaring of young lions;  
As the roaring of the terrible sea.  
Then did they all fall down  
Worshipping the Holy Lord of Spirits:  
Blessed are ye, O saints, and pure of heart:  
Bright and glorious is your lot!  
Ye shall exist in the light of the sun;  
In the pure beam of everlasting life  
Whose days shall have no end;  
Neither shall the days of the saints be numbered,  Who seek light, and who obtain righteousness;  Peace be unto them with the Lord of the Universe.  For like the Sun hath Truth arisen,  
While the night of darkness hath passed away,  There shall be the Light which shines for ever  Beaming in increase before the King of Spirits.  
After these I beheld thousands of thousands,  
And myriads of uncounted myriads;  They stood before the Thrones of Heaven,  And sang to harps and flutes.  
On the four wings of the Thrones of Heaven;  On the four sides I saw others;  
Their names, their orders, their gradations,  Were announced to me by the Angel;  They blessed and praised the Lord of Glory;  The first Voice blessed Him for ever,  And the second Voice blessed the Messengers.  And those also who are martyrs for truth.  And the third Voice did entreat sweetly  For those who are in bondage on the earths,  Whose cry ascends from sorrowful hearts  In supplication to the Lord of Spirits.  And the fourth Voice said unto the satans  Depart ye; go accursed;  
Ye are forbidden from the Circle of the Lord,  Whose laws ye have ever polluted.  
These were Spirits of the Most High God  That spake in four Thunders;  
I heard the Voices of the Four  
As the voice of the sea in wrath. 

CHAPTER XXVII.  
From thence did I proceed towards the East  To a Mountain in a far off Sphere  
Its surface gleamed from a distance  Its heights were crowned with woods.  And waters gushed from its recesses,  And a cataract of many cataracts;  

It foamed like a living creature  
Amid trees, and clouds, and mists.  
Then went I onward from the Wilderness,  
Towards the eastern side of the Mountain;  
There were Trees of sweetly-smelling perfume,  Frankincense, and myrrh, and sandal.  
The beauty of each one of these Trees  
Was different from the beauty of all the others.  So infinitely varied are all the works  
That issue from the hand of God.  
And over all was the bright Mountain  
Elevated, like a silver firmament:  
Cassia breathed from all its pores,  
And sunshine sat upon its sides.  
Thence did I pass amid certain Lakes,  
Whose waters never failed;  
There was the Tree of Fragrance, Zakasinon,  Goodly among celestial gardens.  
Beside the Lakes were other Trees,  
Breathing cinnamon, but fairer than cinnamon;  And under their boughs celestial Spirits  
Sat and sang celestial psalms.  
I advanced farther unto the East;  
Here did I behold another Mountain;  
Trees of bloom thickly covered it;  
And pure Fountains rose and sparkled.  
And out of the green-blooming leaves  
The sweet Neketro* dews distilled;  
The trees were loaded like Almond Trees,  
* From this word the Hellenic word Nectar came.  

And their name in heaven is Alma.*  
Their fruit excelled all perfume;  
And all the sweetness of the earth’s produce;  And round them danced celestial Choirs  To the music of golden harps.  
And after these things as I looked forth  
Unto the shining of the Northern Gate,  
Which opened high above the Mountains,  I beheld Seven lofty places.  
They were filled with pure nard,  
And odoriferous forests of papyrus,  
And trees like cinnamon trees,  
And the blue and white lotos.  
From thence I passed above the Mountain peaks,  That shone like a sea of rainbows,  
Onward to the East, over an Ocean of Fire,  More splendent than the flame-west.  
And I wended far into another Sphere:  
And I saw a Spirit who guarded the Sea:  His name in Heaven is Za-ti-El,  
And he brought me to the Paradise Gate.  
O ye star-dwellers,  
How beautiful in your homes ye shine;  
Eagles of fire and Serpents of light amid the heavens:  Gleaming with a ray that exceeds the dawn.  Wisdom fills your spirit-souls;  
Ye follow in the thunder path of the sun;  And far below the birds of justice  
Fly, and do your bidding, O star-dwellers.  * So named after the Holy Spirit—the Tree of Life.  

The Spirit of the Rainbow shines from above,  And in her Silver Wheel is your orbit;  
Lightnings pass not with more rapid flight  
Than ye from west to east.  
Then did their song arise  
Around the Throne of Glory;  
It passed from circle into glowing circle;  
And went into the Supreme Presence.  
And they who were around that Throne,  
Rose and, knelt, and laid down their wands;  And waves, and winds, and all the fires of ether,  Came, and bowed themselves in song.  
I saw the Spirit of the white-bosom  
Glittering in virgin beauty amid the choirs,  
As the Moon over the waving Sea,  
As the Evening Star amid the forest leaves.  
Could I reveal unto thee  
The Mystery of the Sacred Mysteries;  
Then would thy soul upraise itself  
Like a Winged Serpent before the Lord God.  As the wind moves over the shining waters,  So would thy fire-spirit be impelled;  
It would bear thee on the lightnings,  
Like thunders would its wings rustle.  
But the mighty King of Fire;—  
By Him hath it been forbidden;  
I see His glittering Sword—  
It waves—it quivers—and I faint.  
From the White Throne a Voice comes;  
O thou child of the bosom of light,  

Stay, stay, murmur not:  
Why should the Sword descend? 

 
CHAPTER XXVIII.  
Flourishing was this shady Garden  With many trees fragrant and divine;  Their appearance was of varied beauty,  As the colours of the Holy City.  
The Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil  Was there also in the midst thereof;  It was like a tamarind tree  
Bearing fruit which resembled grapes.  Its perfume extended to a great distance;  It was surrounded with light:  
How beautiful is this Tree! I said,  
And how delightful is its appearance.  One of the glorious Spirits answered:  It is the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil,  Whereof the Essences that desire change  Partake, and straight they transmigrate.  For all the Spirits that live in the Universe  Are made free by God;  
They are endowed with full volition;  For this is not a land of slaves.  
As light and darkness are in the Kosmos  So also are the Beautiful and the Base;  They who incline to either are most free,  According to Eternal Ordinances.  
And they who desire the Beautiful only  Abstain wholly from the fruit of this Tree,  

And basking in the sunshine of the Divine,  
They dwell content in Heavenly Dream.  
But they who desire to attain knowledge,  
Whether it be good, or whether it be evil,  
As many great ones do and have done;—  
Taste of the fruit of this Tree.  
Then do they pass into other conditions,  
For thus only can knowledge be obtained;  
But great is the price they pay;  
The possession of the gem is fatal.  
As the highest Spirit before the Throne  
Could never know what it was to be a man,  Until he had taken on himself man’s condition,  And experienced all man’s phases of thought;  Therefore and unto this end for the freely-willing  This Tree groweth here:  
Whosoever shall desire to alter his condition  Let him taste of the fruit and it is done.  
God is the Diffuser of Love,  
Of Life also, and of Beauty;  
But if Death came not and made a change  
Even these might weary in the end.  
Then I lifted up my hands,  
And gave thanks unto the Holy and Great One;  Blessed art Thou, O Lord, O King,  
And great and hallowed is thy majesty.  
Lord of all the creatures of the Spheres—  
King of kings—God of the Unbounded,  
Whose reign, whose wisdom, whose love, whose laws,  Endure throughout ages of ages.  

For ever shall thy dominion last,  
And the renewal of thy Spirits unto light;  The Heavens are thy Throne for ever;  The stars are but thy lowly footstool.  Thou dost know all things;  
Thou dost hear all things;  
Nor is there aught in light or darkness  That stands concealed from Thee.  
Thou considerest the wants of every creature,  And takest heed that it may satisfy its want;  Whatever tends unto perfection  
That thou dost prepare for all.  
There is no place in heaven or in earth  That does not manifest thy boundless love;  There is no life throughout the Infinite  That shares not in thy loving thought.  
And I saw Three Splendours,  
And each impelled a chariot of steeds:  And the phantom of a Golden Vase  
Shone afar before the eyes of each.  
In the heaven above them was a cluster of lights;  The sun, the golden glory of stars,  
And a beam like that of the moon,  
And the Æther-Rainbow.  
The Seraphim—those gliding kings,  
And each was iris-girdled,  
And each glittered with a myriad eyes—  Lo! they followed in the bright track,  The Cherubim came in fire;—  
From the Golden Incense Altar;  

In their eyes the spirit of a power  
That pervades the vast Infinite.  
Thou hast seen the sun in storms;  
Even so was their serene grandeur,  
Or the moon after the battle;  
Even so was their calm light.  
Then the Ophanim passed rapidly,  
With the wind in their feet;  
These are solar kings;  
But I conceal their secret lore.  
And the bi-formed girdled with stars;  
And the six-winged with the sun-rays:  
* This Incense Altar, which is the Altar of the Apocalypse,  appears in a Medal by Beger, enshrining stars or worlds of light;  the legend is S. C., or Sancta Casa, and it appears in the shape of  a Tabernacle; See part I, 597, or Ark of the Covenant; Part II,  40, 63, 98, 108, 149, 540. In the other Medal is the Amreeta  Vase of the Waters of Life; the Magnet-Vase with the label S.  C., or Sacra Cymba, the Sacred Boat or Vessel; while the two  Olive Trees, seen in the Apocalypse, section 28 (Part I, 543; Part  III, 558), bloom in beauty at each side. E. X. is Euangelos  Chrestos: the Good Angel, the Anointed.  
 
Their swords glistened in the violet mist—  Their sceptres were as olive trees.  
Then did a Cloud snatch me up;  
The winds raised me above the Sphere;  They placed me in the Celestial Land  Upon a place of many thunders.  
There I saw another Vision;  
Palaces of the heavenly-pure;  
There did Spirits hymn to God;  
They interceded for the sons of men.  The sun bright Heaven flowed around.  Love and beauty were like dew:  
Righteousness flowered before their faces;  The bloom of light was over all.  
Thus shall it be with them for ages of ages.  With these countless, dazzling Spirits;  They dwell under the wing of the Eternal,  And sing in the measure of the stars.  They stand before Him like living fire;  Their mouths, a blessing, like sweet honey;  Their lips glorify the Supreme One,  And virtue shone through each.  
There was I desirous of remaining;  My spirit longed for its antecedent home;  Once, like these also, had I stood before God.  Then did I extol His Name.  
Blessed be He, and ever blessed,  
The Lord of the Star-bright Lands:  Wise, before the Universe was formed,  Wise, when all shall have passed away.  What are the earths? and what is man?  

And he who sleeps and praises Thee not?  
All are but as leaves that rot in winter;  
They have lived, and now they are no more.  But blessed in thy light are they  
Who without slumber stand before thy Throne;  They sing unto the Lord of Purity  
Who fills the Universe of Life with love.  

CHAPTER XXIX.  
There are Three Mystical Fountains,  
And over them Twelve Trees bend,  
Making music like sweet harps  
When they tremble to the silver touch.  
Out of their depths Dawn arises;  
The Dawn of the primary beam;  
Light rushes over their depths;  
But oh! what is that LIGHT?  
The Eagles cried, the Serpents rose,  
Like flames of fire into the Sun,  
And I saw the gleam of the Most Ancient:—  WORSHIP GOD ALONE.  
What divides the Spirit from the Soul—  
The splendent flame from the smoke;  
What is the light of the eye?  
What is the vivid force of the heart?  
I see a White Fountain  
Flowing in the midst of shrubs;  
I see a Rainbow touch the earth;  
Yet it is not of the earth.  
Version 20180823
294 THE BOOK OF GOD. 
The Moon is in the mid-heaven,  
Yet is she not the surrounding air;  
The pulse of nature is in the ocean,  
Yet the ocean is not nature.  
There saw I an Island of Fire,  
Rivers of Flame poured out of its depths,  And many Spirits bright as waves  
Mingled beautifully with the golden lightnings.  In the midst I saw a Throne  
Shining like a white Star of Beauty;  But it gleamed amid solemn silence;  Darkly-silent—darkly-splendid.  
And in the front a Silver Sea;  
And at its feet Seven Rivers,  
And round its arch Seven Rainbows,  And at the sides were Silver Wheels.  Voices of Waves and mystic Waters  Echoed all around that Throne:  
And I saw Pillars of resplendent lustre,  And I heard Trumpets that spake of God.  Men passed with musical harps;  
Men passed with gleaming swords,  
As fishes in the sea,  
So did they glide amid oceans of fire.  Who are these? the Angel said:  
I said, My Lord, thou knowest;  
He looked at me with piercing eyes:  Thou also, O Enoch, art not ignorant.  They passed like evening clouds,  
Mild and bright, and vivid;  
Over the hills of darkness;  

Into green plains.  
The eagles cried with joy;  
The thunders leaped—they laughed;  Bring back the many unto God  
Blessed is he who bringeth even one.  
Clothe thee in thy blue girdle.  
O Son of Prayer,  
Tremble not; let not thine eyes roll;  
Beat not in heart, nor let thy words falter.  I will show thee the secrets of the Deeps—  The mystic song of the Ancient;  
It was murmured in the Dark  
Before the mountain streams rolled in light.  He shall come upon the shores of the world;  He shall draw his dominion over them,  Thrice, thrice, thrice;  
But they will not hearken unto Him.  Deeply moving in its mighty strength  Is the blue-green Adi;  
Who shall escape the volume of gloom  Who shall flee from the billowy flame of death?  The Lord of Thunders rises,  
The Sovereign of Lightnings and of Fires;  He looses the chain;  
I see His chariot in the dark violet mists.  O Lady of Beauty!  
O sparkling Queen of Stars!  
The sea rises in its terrors;  
Like glittering spears are its foaming waves.  Four times the thunders snorted  
Like steeds of battle in their rage;  

The Nine with diadems of pearl  
Entreated: Stay the broad-breasted:  
But it comes; it rolls like mountain steeds  Terrible with hoofs and necks of smoke:  I saw the Power of the pale-gleaming—  His sword fell, and all was death.  
Shall I unfold the Mysteries of Light?  The secrets of the Ocean-Stream?  
Shall I unveil the Beam of Heaven  
That like the Green Rainbow moves over the sea?  The Sons of Fire come forth;  
The pride-winged Dragons of the Skies;  They glittered in the golden stream of clouds;  They said: O Messenger, stay thee;  
Let not thy voice go forth  
To reveal the dark secrets,  
And the stars twinkled in a dim splendour  Saying: unto my spirit: Stay.  
Even in light there are secret recesses  Where the spirit seeks repose,  
As the sun sinks into clouds  
To re-appear more beautifully.  
There music lulls them,  
And the rustle of the mystic forests,  
And the Soul-Illuminator comes and gleams  In pictures of serene loveliness.  
The gentle words of books prevail  
Over the sea of wandering thoughts,  
And dreams like spring showers  
Bathe them in a dew of light.  
In an alcove green with palm trees,  
  
Shaded from the heaven-sun,  
I sank, wearied with the brightness  
That lay upon my dazzled spirit.  
An Egg, more beautiful than the Sun  
When in the sparkling West he sinks,  
Gleamed, as if it shone amid ten thousand rainbows  Of the most pure and dazzling light;  
But quick as the whirl of a sword  
In the hand of a young hero,  
It shone—it revolved—it vanished;  
It was a momentary glimpse of the Universe.  
Flowing are the streams of fire  
Over which the Eagle-Angels soar;  
From the mountains rush torrents of flame—  The forest trees are pillars of light.  
In their white robes of splendent glory  
The Ancients pass amid the whirl;  
The Voice of Beauty sounds  
And smooths the dark-red billows.  
O ye Mystic Fountains—  
Three Sources of the Primary Worlds,  
Rising into light like morning beams,  
Let me bathe my spirit in your blue.  
We passed the troubled whirlpools of fire;  
Many dark Wanderers we saw,  
Garmented they were in black;  
Their faces were sunless.  
But far off in the distance we saw Vales,  
And the altar fires of the Mysteries;  
There did the bright Isarim pray;  

The groves echoed with their psalms.  
Like white stars moving in light  
They circled round the Serpent-Shrine,  And raised their arms of snow  
In adoration of the Silent Lightnings.  
I stood in silence amid those star-courses;  I longed to see the Holy Sanctuary;  
Streams of rushing fire rolled around;  The winged lightnings quivered.  
From East to West, from North to South  It seemed one vast and splendid sea of flashes,  As if it were a furnace ever quivering  
With clouds of new-born lustre.  
Come thou, unto the Waters of the Sun;  Bathe thee in its splendent fountain,  
And on thy thigh receive the visible sign  That marks the true Apostle.  
Swift as a star I was borne onward  
Into that Sea of Light—  
And there transfigured in a dream  
I was bathed in mists and clouds.  
And now I moved as in a dark dream;  The Serpent of the Spheres was coiled around me;  We wandered as in fiery mist,  
Yet was there a sound of sweet music.  Afar off, in a Cloud of Rainbows,  
He showed me the Ambrosial City,  
Girdled with a choir of gleaming suns;  This is the Abode of the Celestial.  
And I saw a Hand lustrous in its beauty,  And it held the Morning Star;  
 
This is the clothing of the Sons of Heaven—  She raised it, as though She did present.  
Eagle of the fiery wood,  
Thus spake he in mine inner ear.  
There are Twelve Children of Light  
Who shall go forth from the Halls of Flame.  The first-born shall dispel the darkness  
Which, like a night, looms over the multitudes;  The last Messenger, the true and faithful,  
Shall flash the beauty of the rainbow.  
Phani is his name;  
An oak of trembling leaves and branches:  
But the forest trees shall listen  
To the melody of its waving boughs.  
He spake and sank into the Sun,  
And the Sun gleamed with double glory,  
But the echo of his mystic speech  
Bang in thunder through my spirit.  
Slowly over the calm waters  
Came the Spirit of Thrones;  
Her long white robe flowed to her feet;  
In her hand the Silver Circle.  
The stars followed in her train like servants;  The Sun and Moon bowed down:  
Amen! Amen!  
This was all I heard,  

CHAPTER XXX.  
Another Vision then did I behold:  
Clouds invited me; a Mist embraced me;  
The stars glittered and moved in splendour; 
Flashes of lightning impelled me forward,  And winds accelerated my ascent.  
They elevated me higher and higher,  
Where I beheld a wall built with stones of crystal;  A belt of fire surrounded it,  
And my heart was filled with terror.  
I entered into this quivering flame,  
And drew nigh unto a mighty Palace;  Its walls and pavements were of crystal,  Every stone was of a fiery brightness.  And in the roof the stars wandered  
With a restless, agitated light,  
And tongues of fire and lightning flashes  Darted through its spacious halls,  
And there were Cherubim of a flame-splendour,  Like meteors in a starry sky;  
A dazzling flame burned in its battlements;  The Gates were flame also.  
And when I entered into this place,  
Behold it was hot as fire and cold as ice;  Every symbol of delight was there;  
But terror overpowered my spirit:  
My heart beat—my heart trembled;  
A fearful agitation seized me;  
I fell upon my face and was sore afraid,  Yet I looked the Vision in the eyes.  
And behold I saw another Habitation  
More vast and splendid than the first,  
And all its mighty Gates were wide open,  And it stood firm in the midst of ever-rolling fire.  It is impossible to describe its glory,  
 
Or its awful vast and boundless magnitude,  So greatly did its wondrous structure excel in all things,  Whatsoever the thought of man is able to conceive.  Its floor was pure dazzling flame;  
Above were flashing lightnings and tongues of fire;  And darting, agitated stars were there.  
And the dome was an intolerable splendour.  And in the centre I saw a Throne.  
Azure-white it was like sun-illumined ice;  
Its circle was the circumference of the sun’s orb,  And songs and hymns of Seraphim were heard.  And underneath this mighty Throne,  
Rivers of red fire flowed:  
To look upon the lustre was impossible;  
To gaze and live was a forbidden thing—  
ONE great in mystery sat upon it,  
Whose robe was brighter than the sun;  
Whiter than snow it glittered;  
More dazzling in its colours than an ice-mountain.  No spirit could look upon the face  
Of this Being, the Glorious—the Effulgent;  No mortal could behold that Light  
Except within the trance of vision;  
A fire of flaming fire was around;  
A fire of flaming fire rose up before,  
So that of the myriad myriads that circled the Throne  Not one could go nigh.  
But the Divine requires not holy counsel,  
Nor the advice of the wise of heaven,  
Yet did not the pure Spirits who were around and near  
Depart one moment from that Glory.  
They went not from that glorious glowing Presence,  For there is Paradise effused.  
There did I veil my face;  
I advanced with trembling awe;  
My heart quivered as I went.  
Then the Divine called me, saying:  
Approach hither, Eඇඈർඁ, at my bidding,  
And I was raised up even unto the entrance,  But my eye was fixed on the ground;  
Then addressing me the Voice spake,  
Hear thou me—neither be thou afraid;  
Approach hither and hearken!  
Unto the fallen ones of earth descend!  
I looked, and in the hand of God I saw  
Flowers—his beautiful sceptre;  
I looked again, and saw lightnings,  
These also as a sceptre did He wield.  
Then the Seraphim, the Cherubim, and Ophanim,  Were seen, the sleepless Splendours of the Most High;  Who know not rest, repose, or slumber,  
But watch the Throne of God for ever.  
And I beheld Angels, innumerable thousands,  Myriads of myriads in that House of Fire—  With them was the Beautiful One  
Whose robe was glory indescribable.  
And the Twenty-Four Ancients,  
Borne in chariots of flame;  
Thunders pealed—lightnings glittered  
As they marched in the sun-paths!  
Then did I fall prostrate  

While all my flesh dissolved away:  
My spirit also became changed.  
I was transfused into a shining star.  
Oceans of fire commingled with oceans of waters: I  saw their whitely-shining waves advance in sunlight  beautiful as an army of swans.  
Over and upon them innumerable blessed Spirits, and  some were winged, and some were wingless, but all were  lovely.  
And streams of song and melody were heard; the  sweet accents of golden harps, and of voices chaunting  the love of God, and of the beauty that abides in  heaven.  
O ye Dwellers amid the Stars,  
Who move on billows of lucid fire  
Borne amid the wild music of the Spheres,  
Amid the sweet echoes of the sea.  
Ye are Angels—Angels of the Waters—  
Hear the harp-string of my trembling soul;  
Give me of your sacred wisdom  
That I may teach the earth-wanderers.  
May God protect you, they answered:  
Receive this holy Wand,  
And with it mark the sons of men  
With the heavenly token of the One.  
Another Splendour now I saw;  
The Spirits of this high heaven:  
They answered unto their names one by one  As the Voice of God called them.  

God spake, and the Spirits heard Him;  Unto each was light allotted in that moment;  Light according to the lustre of his works;  For splendour generates splendour,  And I saw the Spirits transfused;  
They transmigrated into the Beautiful;  They mingled with the Celestial Intelligences  That shone around the Thrones of Infinity.  Splendour issued from these splendid ones  As light from the sun and stars:  
Never is its beauty dimmed;  
It is the essence of their own nature.  
The Lord of Spirits sat upon his Throne;  The Spirit of Beauty was over Him;  Lightnings came from his lips;  
Sinners saw them, and they perished.  But to the Holy Essences of Heaven,  Who received the commandments of God,  A combined power, multiform, myriad eyes,  Voices, splendours like fire were given.  And they all hymned before Him,  
As if with an united song:  
Blessing, glorifying, exalting—  
Him, the One, the Holy One of Ages.  And every Power that is in Heaven,  And all the Pure Intelligences,  
The Cherubim, the Seraphim, the Ophanim;  All the Spirits of Power:  
And all the Mighty ones of Wisdom  Raised their sacred hymns of light,  And love, and praise, before the Father.  

Blessing, glorifying Him, the Holy.  
Blessed art Thou, O Lord!  
And may thy Name be praised for ever:  
All who are in Heaven bless it:  
All the Holy among Celestials praise it.  
All the Pure who dwell in Paradise;  
Every Spirit that lives in light,  
Every mortal who hath known truth  
Glorifies thy Name for ever and ever.  
Great is thy benevolence, O Lord,  
And thy power from generation to generation;  Thy majesty and magnificence—how great they are;  Deep are all thy mysteries.  


