CHAPTER XVI.  
By command of the Eternal I make known truth.  
My son hearken to my speech;  
A Voice calls me; a Spirit is formed around me;  I reveal things needful to be known;  
Listen to the word of my mouth.  
Beloved, bind thyself to integrity:  
Approach it not with double heart:  
Walk not with the two-minded:  
Their tongues are scorpions.  
But persevere steadfastly in righteousness,  With Truth alone for thy companion:  She is an Angel from Heaven,  
Though she dwelleth some time on the earth.  I know that injustice exists;  
Yea, that it prevails greatly;  
Yet even on the earth retribution happeneth,  And the sinful are torn up by the roots.  Let the fear of the Lord be in all thy works,  And gain shall come to thee without labour.  Rise not with the sun, or retire with the moon,  Until thou hast bowed unto the Holy Name.  Greatest of all Spirits;  
Most exalted of all Intelligences;  

The First in the Heavenly Spheres;  
The Fountain of the Beautiful and Holy.  
The Lord of Justice goeth forth from Heaven.  He goes to put in force his Laws:  
The evil doers are swept away:  
They perish under the face of the sun.  
Every unholy tower shall crumble;  
It shall be burnt with its keepers in fire:  
The plough shall scatter its ruins;  
They shall fall into a judgment of death;  
The flaming womb of hell receives them;  
They are clothed in darkness and confusion:  From the Divine Presence they are expelled;—  The Sword of Flame warns them away.  
The pure shall wake as if from sleep;  
Wisdom shall be exalted high:  
But by the Sword shall sinners perish:  
In flame shall the blasphemer pine.  
Every work of the ungodly shall disappear;  
The habitations of the evil shall rot,  
But the House of the Great King and Judge  
Shall stand in majesty for ever.  
Garments of life are with the Lord of Spirits,  Pure robes of light everlasting;  
In the presence of Him, they shall not wax old,  Nor shall the splendour of their owners diminish.  And when the former heaven shall pass,  
A new heaven shall appear in its place,  
The pure shall shine in seven-fold light  
In the majesty of the Lord’s splendour.  

Be thou not aggrieved because of the times;
There is a period prescribed to all things;  
Let the truly good arise and gird himself  
With virtue, holiness, and love.  
Love shall descend in a shower of light  
Upon him who loveth truly:  
His way shall be a path of roses;  
He shall walk in everlasting sunshine.  
From mystic visions, from the Holy Spirit,  
Hath my soul learned these things:  
I have read them in the Tablets of Heaven;  
Let men receive them in the heart.  
My son, survey the various Heavens of Light;  The vast and varied Ocean with its treasures:  The islands, continents, and mountains;  
Whence have they come? and who made them?  Who formed them to shine in lustre?  
Who impelled their living energies?  
Who clothed them in robes of beauty?  
Imprinting grandeur upon every part.  
Was it not Gඈൽ?—the Divine Being:  
The Infinite and Intellectual Splendour?  
The one Immortal amid the mortal:  
The one Eternal amid that which dies.  
1. Hearken now unto me, for I speak the Truth of God as no other man speaketh it; that which is the  Truth is here in me; it existeth nowhere else among  mortals.  
2. I heard a choir of Holy Spirits, chaunting this  hymn amid the Heavens; soft was the music of their  voices as they rose to God like perfume.  
3. O thou, who seekest knowledge of the Holy One, be thyself imbued with sacred thoughts; follow not the  Divine for things that are unhallowed, nor pursue celes tial things with carnal purposes. God is Eternal; the  Universe is perpetual: God is exempt from time, but  the Universe subsists in time. God, who is all Life,  Light, and Love, subsisted prior to both Light and Dark ness: from all eternity in venerable solitude; He had no  equal, nor any rival.  
4. All men are equal before God; all men are the  children of Him! Mortal! forget not this truth; let it  be graven on thy inmost heart. In thy morning hour  meditate upon it; remember it in the time of night: let  it shape all thine actions, and never once be absent from  thy life.  
5. Wouldst thou see what God has made distinct?  observe the difference in trees and birds; the dove differs  from the peacock; the banyan differs from the rose. But  man hath the same bone and figure; is born in the same  way, and dieth in the same way: therefore write this  upon thine heart, that all men are one and the same.  
6. There is One Sovereign Power and One God who  made the Heavens and the Earths: who made the Oceans  and the force of Winds, and gave their brightness to the  lightnings.  
7. The Universe, which was a breath from God,  gradually grew into its perfect beauty, in millions of re volving years, by the laws of gravity, fluidity, and centri fugal force.  
8. God is not the Sun, yet is He the beauty of the  Sun. God is not the Ocean, yet is He the Majesty of  the Ocean. God is not the Wind, yet is He the Swiftness of the Wind. God is not the Light, yet is He the Splendour of the Light; for He is the Source in all things  of their essence, and of that which makes them glorious  and divine; hence their glory and divineness are but faint  types of Him who irradiates them with these very qualities.  
9. The Supreme Being is Life, Light, and Wisdom; a  Triad in name, but One in energy; He has moulded all existences and things visible and invisible out of mere  atoms.  
10. And out of the dark, whirling, stormy atmosphere  which was the Chaos of conflicting Powers, He formed  the bright harmonious oceans of ether; calm in solemn  beauty and repose.  
11. But when the Harmony of Heaven sounds, the  stars, the seas, the rivers, hear with rapture; the sky  rejoices at the splendid music, and Nature symphonizes  with Heaven.  
12. This Chaos, whereof the Universe is formed, was  void of form, or quality, or harmonized energy; but  was in its plastic nature capable of form, and of being  reduced into perfect proportions. It did not begin to  exist, nor can it be annihilated; but it perpetually undergoes transformations: whence arise all the modes of  existence and all the manifested appearances of matter.  13. Before the Universe was shaped into beauty the  whole Space was filled with God; the Infinite-Intellectual everywhere prevailed, until the Eternal Mind spake.  Then the Divine Masterpiece was formed; then the  Spirit-Light withdrew within a Circle; enfolding and  ensphering, as if in a ring, the mighty grandeur of the  new creation.  
14. This Universe is full of life: spirits visible in forms and images; spirits invisible to the natural eye,  and only seen within the sun-bright spheres.  15. Like the shadow which the golden rays of the  Evening Star cast, when bodies interpose between her and  the earth, are the thin ethereal luminous forms of those  who wander in these Shining Places. They are not male  —they are not female—they assume shapes at will: the  grandeur of the heroic form—the beauty of the child virgin.  
16. The Universe is composed of Nine Circles, im mense and splendid Spheres of glowing light; and with out all is the Sphere of Gඈൽ Eternal, embracing the  other worlds of creation.  
17. Three Spaces of Spheres are there—Spheres of  Heaven; the Circle of Space which none but Gඈൽ can  inhabit; the Circle of Causes which comprehends all  existences; the Circle of Happiness which all may  attain.  
18. Yet all this starry firmament of beauty shall pass  away, and cease to be in days to come; they shall be  changed by fire; they shall be renovated by water, as of  old in the olden time. God shall come forth out of the  places afar off; He will tread upon the mountains, and  the mountains shall give way under Him, and the valleys  shall be made straight before His feet, and the pillars of  the earths shall be shaken; the Voice of the Supreme  shall be heard; the mighty Heaven shall hear and trem ble; the sea and the waves shall quake with terror. The  sun shall not be visible; the moon also shall withhold  her light; but there shall be no death, nor any destruction; but all shall be renovated and made more  beautiful than ever.  

19. As the earth produces trees and flowers from its  bosom, but is itself neither trees nor flowers, but com prehends these beautiful things within it in their seed  or in their verdant bloom: as the sea produces shells  and roses, yet is itself neither shells nor roses, but  comprehends these beautiful things within the azure  valleys of its bosom. Even so is it with the All-Cir cling Father, from whom Spirits of all species proceed;  of Him, in Him, through Him and by Him, yet wholly  distinct and separated from Him.  
20. O Son! confide everlastingly in the Lord Gඈൽ:  put thy faith in Him, as in the Just Father; who giveth  his meed unto every creature; and He will not disap point thee in thy faith.  
21. Man is spirit, soul, and body; three properties in  one appearance; but his spirit-part is immaterial and  undying, and his bodily part is mortal. But the aro matic essence, which is the intermediate soul, partakes  of the earthly and the celestial; it survives the earth,  and transmigrates into a higher Sphere, but cannot enter  into that which is most high.  
22. God hath given as a guardian angel to every man  his conscience, which tells him what is right; which  rebels whenever he meditates evil. My son! let this angel  lead thee in all things.  
23. O great and splendid spirit who art in man, feed ing upon the garbage of the vile earth, go to the lion,  and take a lesson from the lion, who would die rather  than touch the leavings of a dog.  
24. The spirit longing to be free anticipates dissolution;  it looks forth into the Paradise-ether; it longs to leap into splendid light, freed from the mortal body which is  its chain.  
25. As the body of the dead changes into a new form  of life, developing itself in grass, or flowers, or worms; even so his spirit, which is immortal, passes into existence  different from that which it possessed before.  
26. The Twelve Incarnations of God are Twelve shin ing Mountains, bright as gems, with hearts of living  flame; with energies resistless as burning fire.  
27. Twelve are the Mountain-spheres or Mountains in  the Father’s house, which is the Universe: into each one  of these ascendeth a Messiah, with the glorious host of  his followers.  
28. There are Twelve shining Wells of pure Waters  which send forth Twelve Rivers; the Twelve Wells are  Spirits of the Messiahs; the Twelve Rivers are their  evangels.  
29. There is a Book of Light in Heaven divided into  Twelve Chapters; each chapter is the pure evangel of  one of the Incarnated Messiahs.  
30. The Laws that God hath once made never can be  changed even in the least; the laws of men are fallible  and are altered by men: the laws of God are infallible  and immutable.  
31. God is Eternal; He is wrongly designated when  He is called the Everlasting. The Eternal never had a  beginning: the Everlasting had a beginning, but will have  no end.  
32. God sends his Sacred Messengers of Truth into  other spheres as well as into the sphere of man. Look  aloft upon the starry heavens: unto all these orbs there  are Messiahs.  

33. As the life of man is ever sustained by fresh air,  and perishes if it receive it not, so do souls and spirits  perish if Truth (which is their life) be not renewed unto  them.  
34. God doeth all his wondrous works through the  medium of the first born One. This is the Spirit of God  who everlastingly reneweth all things.  

35 In the Paradise-sphere of God there is a Fountain*  Embowered around by olive trees and palms,  The sun ariseth in its bosom,  
The golden stars emerge from its silver zone.  Blue are its shining waters,  
Of a deep blue like a child’s dark eyes,  
And when its ripples glitter in the sunlight,  
They are as a thousand flashing emeralds.  
O pilgrim of Gඈൽ! seekest thou this Fountain?  Wouldst thou taste its sweet waters?  
O Wanderer of Eternity, follow  
And I will lead thee to its green solitude.  
Behold, the sun goeth before us in our journey,  The sun himself points out the way.  
O pilgrim! faint not, neither be a-weary,  
The Paradise-fountain is at hand.  
And when we reached this lonely Fountain  
* This Fountain or Elixir of life is probably alluded to in an  old Egyptian mythos. Isis, says Diodorus Siculus, invented a  medicine which imparts immortality to those who take it, and by  this she restored life to Or the (Messenger) after he had been found  in the water overwhelmed and killed by Titans, or the Giants.  

We saw a Virgin with fair eyes,  
Softer was she than the beam of morning;  
Her smile was as the rose in summer.  
She bathed our feet, she poured rich perfume  Over our hands and travel-soiled hair;  
And when we rested she gave us sweet wine  And cakes of honey richer than ambrosia.  
36 Thou shalt not worship any idol,  
Thou shalt not do any murder,  
Thou shalt not speak against the name of God,  Thou shalt not go after a married woman;  
Thou shalt not steal the goods of any,  
Thou shalt not do an unjust thing—  
These are six precepts which I heard in Heaven  From the Sacrosanct.  
37 Vain of men are offerings to the Winds  
On the altars at the mountain’s base;  
Vain the trenches which your priests dig,  
That they make evoke spirits to their magical songs.  Odious is the hand that wields the dart,  
That pierces the soft flesh of deer and hare:  But the water-lily brightens in the face  
Of him who spares life.  
38. O Son! let this truth be graven on thy soul with  adamantine pencil in living flame; that Virtue alone is  true happiness; and Vice is misery in all respects.  
39. All Vice is weak in its beginnings; but it grows  until it is too strong for a mighty man; then does it wax  shameless before God and Earth, so that there is no  crime without an apologist.  

40. In the name of God there is a great mystery: it  is not lawful to utter it except with holy purpose; in  the morning hour, before the sun rises, and after he  descends; before meals, and before repose.  
41. That spirit goeth unto God, whose works are  done for the sake of God; who esteemeth Him the Lord  Supreme; and himself His servant, and His alone.  
42. Beautiful and bright is the road that leads to  Heaven: a crystalline splendour of glory girds it round;  it is a paven way of glittering light; sunbeams circle it,  and stars illumine it with lustre. But the evil behold it  not; it is invisible to their gloomy eyes; it shines  majestically like the rainbow’s arch, but they behold  only darkness and a void.  
43. There is a Golden Fire in the Paradise land,  through which Pure Spirits pass at every revolution of  the sun; hence they grow everlastingly bright, and  glitter with the freshness of new flowers. But woe  unto that thoughtless one, who having lapsed even in  the least degree of thought, enters the heart of that  Golden Fire—he is ejected in agony and confusion.  
44. There is a Starry Fountain in the Heavens,*  where the Spirits of Beauty bathe: therein do they  renew their youth, their brightness, and all that is  divine. But woe unto that thoughtless one, who having  lapsed even in the least degree of thought, goes into that  Starry Fountain—it becomes to him a well of liquid fire.  
45. Man cannot make himself wholly-pure, though he  laboureth thereunto night and day; shall he then do  nothing, or sit despondent?—yea, this is to make himself  wholly impure.  
46. As the light that emanates from the sun diffuses  happiness and radiance, so the love that emanates from  God is the delight of the blessed in Paradise.  
47. The pure angels of God are such, that in one  breath they traverse the Sphere; they fly on lightning  pinions, whithersoever their will impels them.  
48. God loves to be veiled. He will not be seen by  the profane. He enfolds Himself in dazzling splendour.  Who is worthy to look upon Him? Eternal, Invisible,  All-presiding, He is cognizable by no sense of man: He  cannot be conceived even in the mind; He cannot be  comprehended by aught that exists.  
49. Everything that hath life cometh from Gඈൽ; even  from Him who is the Universal Parent; and every  living essence on the earth hath within it the fire of  everlasting life.  
50. There is another and a future Sphere, where all  the good shall live in sunbeams; there is another and a  future Sphere, where all the bad shall weep in desola tion.  
51 As the harmony dwells within the flute,  
Even so does the spirit unseen in the body;  
No man can see the music, yet it is there,  
Even so can no man see the spirit, yet it is there.  52. All spirits pass into other appearances, as soon as  death hath operated on their bodies; each taketh unto  itself that form of existence for which its habits and  aspirations have prepared it (9).  
53. Let not a son sit in the presence of his father  until he has received permission to do so; let not a wise  man receive a gift from the mean; there is pollution in  the gold of the sordid.  

54. Before the rising of the sun, let no common lan guage come from thy lips; but let thy thoughts meditate  in holy contemplation on Him who maketh the sun to  rise.  
55. Marriage is a sacred duty imposed on all; let no  strong man live in celibacy; happy is he who leaves  behind him a representative, to fulfil the works which he  has begun.  
56. Who is she that cometh not unto her husband’s  bed, a virgin, pure from all defilement? she shall be as  foul polluted water; she shall not be worthy of his  love.  
57. But the chaste wife is the honour of the family;  she who presents the children; the wife is the man’s  earthly soul; his half, his best friend, the source of all  his happiness.  
58. She, with her endearing conversation, is the friend  in solitude, the mother to the oppressed; a refreshment  of delight and comfort on the wearisome wilderness of  life.  
59. Beautiful are the hands of that woman who  weaves, who spins, who embroiders; who brings up her  offspring with mutual love and tenderness, guarding each  one as the apple of her eye.  
60 Reverence the Holy One,  
It is the first of all duties;  
It makes the heart pure;  

It restrains all evil passion.  
My son, revere the Mighty;  
Fear none but him who fears not God;  
There is no wisdom but in virtue;  
The chief of fools is the impious man.  
Whoso worships self, worships hell;  
But the worship of the Supreme is heaven;  
The wicked are in darkness;  
But to the pure there is an Asylum of Light;  Swear not by the Sacred Name;  
Nor give homage to the earthly;  
If thy spirit aspires not beyond the dust,  
Thy future shall be with the dust.  
Study also to know God;  
If thou know Him not, thou canst not know thyself;  If mortals knew what cometh after,  
They would shrink with terror from sin.  
God is a Shining Mirror,  
In which the Universe is imaged:  
Yea, and the smallest thing or sin in the Universe  Is reflected there in clear light.  


CHAPTER XVII.  
Now when I had uttered these words,  
I was borne upward in a Whirlwind;  
I was carried off westward;  
Many mysteries I beheld.  
A mountain of iron, a mountain of copper,  
A mountain of silver, a mountain of gold,  
A mountain of fluid metal,  
And a mountain of lead (10).  
And I enquired of the Lion, saying,  
What are these which in secret I see?  
As I spake a horror passed over him,  
As a land rent by an earthquake.  
And he said: Those things of which thou askest  Are laid up for One who shall come;  
Who shall hold command over thine earth,  
And break the thrones of emperors.  
Wait, and in a short time thou shalt know;  
Thou shalt read all as in a book written;  
The secret hour shall be revealed,  
The hour which God hath appointed.  
Gold or silver shall not avail,  
Nor an iron sword, nor a coat of brass,  
Nor copper, nor lead, nor metal,  
* The medal above is taken from Beger. It represents the sun crowned Buddha, who combines within himself the Messiah and  Cabir. In his right hand is the Olive Branch: this is the  Messianic symbol; in his left is the Spear: this is the Cabiric  symbol. S. C. is Sol-Cœlestis—the Heavenly or Spirit Sun.  

Though the wicked put their hope in these.  
But each one of these Mountains  
Shall be a slave to him who goeth:  
To make men acknowledge truth,  
And bow before the Word which he proclaims.  
O ye flame-girt Mountains,  
With ancient trees like dark gray hair;  
With streams like the white sea-foam,  
And glory breathing out of every pore.  
The Sun-Bulls of God within your dark cells  Dwell, like lightnings hidden;  
And many a Mighty Sage  
Meditates long over the Holy Mystic.  
Therefore is it meet that in your high presence  I should bow, and feel a solemn influence;  
From thy recesses mayhap may come  
One of the Emperors of earth.  
Here were the Amreeta Lakes—  
Whoso drinks shall shine for ever;  
But over their flow a Serpent watches:  
Terrible is his fate who approaches unworthily.  The Fountains change into devouring fires:  
The Serpent grows into a thousand forms:  
The sons of evil who come near the place  
Are stricken as if with plague:  
They recede into a Vale of Darkness,  
Impelled by violent blasts:  
They can no more taste these Holy Fountains,  Than could a mortal live in fire.  
O ye waves and waters of beauty,  
Gleaming like the white-footed of heaven:  

My soul rises to ye, even as ye rise:  
I long to be commingled with ye.  
Over your crests the Serpents glide,  
The fire-pinioned:  
They dip into your glowing beauty,  
And from the touch draw new loveliness.  
They arise clothed in thunders  
From the mighty Cauldrons of Flame:  
Oh! that I could bathe but one moment  
Within the bosom of your bright embrace.  
This hath the Lord of Heaven said:  
A day shall come when the Messenger shall be throned,  When the pure shall be crowned with mitres,  When they shall choose their own palaces.  Blessed are they who trust in me;  
Who have found their joy in the Father:  
The Chosen shall dwell amid them,  
As a Parent dwelleth with the children.  
I will adorn the glorious face of Heaven,  
So as to give them new delights:  
I will bless it, and clothe it in lustre  
Even for the sake of those Divine ones.  
The spheres of earth also will I change,  
Transforming them to light and loveliness;  That my children may look upon them  
With new enraptured appetite.  
The sacred ones of starry aspiration  
Shall dwell in Palaces of the Stars:  
But the iniquitous, the followers of satwânas,  Shall not see the renovated spheres.  
I have looked upon their daily lives;  

I see that they are as dead men;  
To the unthinking they appear to live:  
But to the wise they are already dead.  
As a corpse moveth not among the quick,  
So neither can he whose nature is sensual  
Abide amid the active essences,  
Or sojourn with moving Spirits of light.  
My son! hear the Statutes of the Lord God,  
The Statutes thou art commanded to fulfil;  
And ponder well upon the truths that I reveal;  Meditating upon them as the words of wisdom.  Thou wert born in thy body of the earth,  
And to the earth thy body shall descend;  
Thou shalt leave behind thee all that perishes,  Thou shalt carry with thee whatsoever is of heaven;  That which men of the earth covet dieth with them;  It passes away, and is no more beheld;  
But that which the Children of Heaven have garnered,  Passes with their spirits into the presence of God.  The seas, the mountains, and the forests,  
The stars, the sun and moon shall pass away:  But the deeds of a virtuous man shall never pass,  Their loveliness shall shine everlastingly. 

 
CHAPTER XVIII.  
Here also I looked upon certain Fountains,  
Enshrined deep within the fiery Columns of Heaven;  Which embraced, but did not scorch their cool beauty,  Neither did the waters prevail over the flame.  And in these Columns of Heaven I beheld fires,  Which fell in showers of lustre, ever and ever.  

But neither on high, nor did they sink into the Deep,  Nor did they descend to mingle with the Mists.  
And over these Fountains I perceived a Vast, which  had neither a firmament above it, as a shelter; nor solid  ground underneath it as a stay; neither was there water  near it, nor any winged thing.  
But all was wild, and desolate, and arid;  
An awful silent Wilderness of Vastation;  
Thick with mists, and black with vapours:  
Swept with cold and poisonous blasts.  
There did I behold Seven luminous Stars, like fire mountains, and like spirits entreating me; and the Eagle  said: This place, unto the end of all things, shall be the  prison-house of the fallen.  
For the Stars which roll headlong over fires,  Are the Spheres of those who do transgress;  Who have disdained the commandments of Gඈൽ,  And ascended not in due season.  
They sank still lower into a lower Deep;  
For all their thoughts were carnal;  
The earthly cannot live in Heaven:  
Nor can the heavenly bide on earth.  
Therefore is the Lord offended with these spirits;  They pass into the Spheres of Vastation;  
There shall they abide in winds and darkness,  Until the consummation in the Secret Year.  
And one of the Spirits said unto me: Wisdom is the  sole splendour; and all foolishness is darkness; and all  denial of the True is misery. Wisdom descended once to earth, but found no place whereon she could abide;  her dwelling therefore is in Heaven; yea, in the Heaven of heaven, Wisdom liveth. Wisdom went forth, in olden  days, to dwell among the sons of men; but she found  not even a roof-tree under which to shield her head.  Wisdom returned again heavenward, and seated herself  before God: He gave unto her a Throne beside himself;  She dwells with Angels of Beauty. Folly went forth,  and lighted on the earth, in the days after Wisdom left  it; she found a home with the sons of mortals; she  changed their pastures to a wilderness: there doth Folly  evermore remain: bright things have their home in  Heaven; the dark dwell in palaces on earth; so opposite  are the gods from men (11).  
Three Spirits, streams of pure light,  
Poured forth rays of sweetest song;  
They moved around a Mystic Vase,  
That glowed with fragrant incense.  
In the centre of Twelve Trees it stood,  
Burning like the Universal Mind:  
And fed by the divine springs  
That flowed from a Cloud of Lightnings.  
Whiter than the Morning Star were they;  
Beauteous as the Virgins of ocean:  
Their wings glistened with the sun-foam;  
Their forms were pillars of splendour.  
From thence I passed along into another place, terrible  with the operation of great fires; blazing, glittering more  fearfully than a comet; and in the midst thereof, a vast  division. Columns of Flame struggled to the end of  the Abyss; and deep was the Gulf into which they fell; but I could not see its extent or depth; neither  could I perceive the place where it began.  
Thunders pealed over those Wildernesses;  
The flame-winged lightnings flashed:  
Like the flight of spears in battle,  
Even so was their rapid brightness.  
I heard a song of sorrows,  
The wailing of despair and death:  
Lonely as the midnight wind  
Amid a thousand winding caves.  
Then did I cry out: How terrible is this spot! how  hard to explore are its recesses. Then one of the Spirits  who was with me answered thus unto my mind; Enoch,  why art thou alarmed at this place? why doth the vast 
ness of its torment scare thee? Lo! it hath been set  apart for evil doers, who have rebelled against all Truth:  herein do they abide while serving sin, because they  mocked the statutes of the Eternal; because they  bowed themselves in gloom unto the evil passions of their  nature.  
Then spake the Lion:—  
Stoop not thyself, O Son of Man!  
Unto the darkly-splendid baits of earth,  
For they will ensnare thy pure spirit,  
They will entangle it for ever in destruction.  But lift thyself upward to the Heaven of God,  The Paradise of Beauty where He dwells;  
Therein is no deceit found,  
But all is sunbright loveliness.  
Seek not the Darkness, O thou heir of heaven!

But hasten rather unto the ever-abiding Light  Which beams before the Divine Father,  
Who gave unto thee a spirit of reason.  
This spirit of light was given unto thee,  
A virgin clothed with the heavens;  
Take heed, I charge thee, that thou keep her pure,  That thou preserve her from all stain.  
Let her be free from worldliness and sin,  
As the snow upon the mountain-top;  
Let her venerate the Lord God  
And walk in His Holy Laws.  
As a harlot envieth a virgin,  
So do the iniquitous hate the good:  
They deck themselves in gold and silver,  
And wag their tongues against the pure of heart.  Every one of them hath given himself to gold:  He panteth after it with all his heart:  
Cold as a rock of ice, and hard,  
Is the inner nature of each one.  
Here also rose a great Mountain,  
With a narrow Valley at its base;  
But towards the ends dark winding plains,  
And rocks black and savage.  
In these out-spreading Wastes  
The Whirlwinds bind up their wings;  
They wake—they rise—they issue forth  
Like eagles ravening for food.  
And in the centre of these, stood a Tree:  
And I wondered much at the Valley and the Tree,  Then I asked: What means this Garden?  
And these Trees, and this misty Valley?  

And the Star-clothed answered, saying:  
This Valley is the Land of the Accursed;  
Here shall be collected all who blaspheme,  
Speaking of the Glorious in impious language:  Here shall they be finally gathered;  
Here shall be their accursed territory.  
They shall be as an example of divine justice:  To the pure, whose righteousness shall shine for ever.  
Tremble not! he said:  
But the coldness of ice stole over me:  
Oh! that I could hide myself,  
Beneath the covert of yonder cavern.  
Tremble not! he said:  
Thou, who art the Messenger:—  
Yet the ice of death was over me,  
As I saw those sights most terrible.  
The children of the dark clouds,  
Who lived in sin, who died in guilt—  
Hast thou more feeling for them than God?—  I was abashed—I died away in shame.  
Then did I question the Spirit:  
Why are they separated by these Fiery Zones?  And still their voices rose in accusation:  
And they wept in tears of blood.  
Then did he make answer: Three are the separations  that divide the pure from the unrighteous: the first, a  Gulf—a Chasm of Darkness; the second is an Ocean of  deep waters; the third, a Fire, which, like a fierce  meteor, shines ten thousand leagues above that Ocean.  For as on earth the dead are buried in graves, so as to be separated from living men, so here the wicked,  which are as fœtid corpses, are divided from the pure  and living. Thus separated, they abide in suffering;  everlastingly cursing one another: thus hath it been  from the beginning; and thus shall it continue unto  the end. In the Secret Day, their living essence shall  not suffer annihilation; neither shall they be able to  soar into Light. Their earthly nature drags them down.  But in this Gulf, and amid this Desert, which they  daily fabricate for themselves, they shall abide in the  Darkness of Slime; in the Darkness which they have  always loved. For as a bird cannot mount in air if it  shall have lost its light wings, neither can they ascend,  weighed down by sin, which hangs like lead upon their  souls. Behold! this is the Eternal Ordinance, the  Ordinance of Nature, Truth and Justice; the pure  shall rise unto the sun; the impure shall be for ever  clogged.  
But their abiding place is not here always;  
They are not chained for ever in darkness:  
An hour of liberation is for all;  
Then they issue forth, and assume form.  
They pass into spheres of life,  
For which they accord in temper:  
They take upon themselves a new development  In conformity with their real nature.  
A sunbeam of light—  
And behold, I was in another place:  
I heard the winds die away  
In a dream of forests and dark woodlands.  
A sparkling Sea of Fire and quivering brightness,
And in the vista a Dark Form;  
The Sovereign Lord, the Supreme Father,  
Covered with ten thousand veils of flashes:  
Did I see that venerable Form?  
I could not penetrate the Three Zones:  
The waters of a deluge seemed to cover me;  They whirled me along in darkness;  
Be not sad, O Messenger!  
Child of the two births:  
The sun-steeds cannot bear thee  
Beyond the roaring waves of yonder flame.  

The Third Psalm
 
O thou Supreme Being! Eternal, Ineffable, and In comprehensible, hearken unto thine humble child, who  longs to be conjoined with thee in spirit; Thou art the  All-Perfect, the Self-existent Fountain of all Existence;  Thou art thyself above all Essences, more beautiful in  thy lustre than all beauty; Thou art the Truth, but  more sublime than all Truth; Thou art the Wisdom, but  more exalted than all Wisdom; Thou art the Good, but  more excellent than all Goodness; for thou art the Principle and the First of all these. As the Sun is the prin ciple of light to the wandering spheres that revolve  around him, so art Thou unto all the Spirits that have  emanated from thy flame-bright centre. Omniscient,  Omnipresent, and All-Powerful, who is worthy to be  adored but Thou? Infinite thou art and comprehendest  all things, but art thyself incomprehensible by all. Thou  art the Giver of all goodness; Thou art the Source of all  that is divine; Thou art the Best of all that is most righteous in the heavenly Spheres which do revolve before  Thee. As the morning light upon the earth, so is thine  hallowed presence to the spirit. As the golden Vesper  Star, so is thy Sacred Aspect unto the spirit-eye. Thou  art the sole Creator; the Sovereign Ruler of the Universe; the Judge all-perfect and all-knowing who metest  out thine equity to the worm of the earth. Be thou  our only Guide and Guardian, who art the common  Parent of all; who bestowest all that is most excellent;  the sweetness of peace, the purity of innocence. Preserve us, Lord! that we may love Thee; Guide us,  Father! that we may walk in thy paths; ever aspiring  upward unto Thee as the flowers that grow heaven ward.  


CHAPTER XIX.  
God, by his Spirit, raised me up into a place  Where was the appearance of gleaming Fires;  And when they pleased they assumed the shapes of Men;  Men of majesty and heroic beauty.  
They bare me onwards to a lofty height;  
To a Mountain which reached the Empyrean:  There did I behold the Receptacles of Thunders  At the extremities of the place where the Gulf was  deepest,  
And each One had in his hand a bow of fire,  And arrows in the shining quiver;  
A sword of fire and armour of pure flame,  
And lightnings terrible in brightness.  
Then they lifted me to living Waters—  
Waters of Life—that spake audibly,  

And to a Flame which caught the setting of the sun,  And from which the Sun drew new blood.  I surveyed the Magnet which supports the World;  The Four Winds which bear up the corners of the earth;  Which flash and lighten like living spirits,  And wave amid the heavenly firmament.  
I beheld also Winds which live in the Empyrean,*  And how they rise between Heaven and Earth:  Great they were and armed with thunders,  Constituting the Pillars of the Universe.  
I saw the Winds also which make the skies revolve,  Which cause the Phantoms of Light to rise and set;  I saw the Winds which waft the clouds,  
Guiding them like ships in their paths. (12)  I saw the broadway of the Spirits of Light,  Paved with the brilliancy of ten thousand suns;  I perceived at the earth’s border the glittering cope  Extending far: a Veil star-studded.  
Then did I pass onward to the South,  
Where burnt Six Mountains formed of gems;  Three there were towards the East,  
And three stretched towards the South.  
Those towards the east were of a varied brightness,  And one was margarite and one opal;  
Those towards the South were scarlet in splendour;  The middle rose like a Throne of God.  
It was all one fair and lucid jasper—  
The highest peak was of clear sapphire;  
Beautiful in body like the radiant form  
Of the Supreme Lord—the Ruler of the Light.  * Symbols of the Cabiri.  

And over all like a curtain of fire  
A blazing light rolled in golden waves:  
In golden waves and starry billows it rolled  More gloriously divine than sunset.  
And there I looked upon a place of loveliness,  Where lucent waters were collected into Lakes,  Glittering over tracts of the angelic,  
Like the moon’s sphere in the purple.  
Lightnings flashed out of these Mountains;  
Their flames rose on high;  
The clouds brightened—the stars were seen;  Eagles of fire whirred and whirled around.  
Mystic Voices echoed on all sides;  
Worship God alone:  
He is the Holy One of Years;  
He is the Sole Ancient:  
AO, Amounm Oul-om
Osiris, Adonm Bel;   
O raiser of the mighty hymn,  
In the star-hour worship Him only.  


CHAPTER XX.  
There but afar off did I behold the King of Spirits,  Whose head was like the snows:  
And near Him stood another One  
Whose face resembled that of Man.  
His countenance was full of grace,  
As is the countenance of a Holy Spirit;  
In his hand he bare thunders;  
The lightnings flashed in his feet.  

Then I inquired of one of the Spirits,  
And I questioned about this Son of Man:  
Who he was? and whence he was?  
And why he was beside the Ancient of Days?  He made answer unto me, saying:  
This is a Son to whom truth belongs:  
In whose heart also wisdom dwelleth:  
He reveals hidden things.  
For the Lord of Spirits hath allowed unto him  The privilege of a high embassy:  
He is the Morning Star  
Whose advent is a source of joy.  
And this Son of Man on whom thou lookest  Shall raise up Kings from their beds;  
He shall awaken great ones on their thrones;  He shall curb the bridles of the haughty.  
He shall break the teeth of sinners;  
* These medals are taken from Beger. That on the right re presents the Holy Spirit giving the kiss of consecration in the  Caduceus, to the Serpent-Buddha: in that on the left she gives  him the Mystic Volume of Truth in the same form as that which  Assyrian Oannes holds in his hand. 

He shall cast down monarchs from their seats;  They who have refused to own a God;  
They who have disdained to humble themselves;  Upon the faces of giants he shall tread,  
Until they shall be filled with confusion;  
He shall trample, he shall cover them with shame;  They shall lie in a pit of dishonour.  
Darkness shall be their dwelling place;  
On scorpions shall be their bed:  
Neither shall they again rise up among men,  But shall be hidden away for ages.  
They honoured not the name of the Father:  
They blasphemed the Beautiful One;  
They lifted up their hands, and wagged their heads,  Against the High, the Holy One of Heaven.  They crushed their people to dust,  
And showed their iniquity to the sun:  
In evil only were they strong:  
And lo, it has deceived them to destruction;  Their faith also was in idols  
Made by the hands of slaves:  
They denied that Gඈൽ was Ruler;  
They expelled the Holy from their temples.  They persecuted those who remained faithful,  Who bare the Name within their hearts;  
But the prayer of the good and true  
Goes up unto the portals of the Lord.  
The blood of the righteous ascends from earth  Into the presence of the King of Spirits;  
It hath a voice, a never ceasing voice,  
That penetrates unto the Judge of all.  
The holy of the heavens meet together;  
 
They raise hymns of praise and supplication;  They call upon the sacred Lord of Justice  To look upon the blood of the slain,  
That the prayers of the pure may not be wind,  But may avail unto a salutary purpose;  That patience may not endure for ever.  Nor the wicked prevail over the good.  
From night we seemed to pass into dawn;  Its crystal beam shone over distant lakes:  Many beautiful ones floated on the waves,  Burnished as the Seraphim of varied light.  They were crowned with shining helmets;  
Their feet and shoulders bare wings;  They moved in happiness and beauty,  And sang amid the intermingling stars:  Follow, follow to the Primary Fountains,  And in their waves renew loveliness;  There are the springs of youth immortal,  Which the Dragons and the Eagles guard.  
Behold the Ancients of Days is on his Throne—  The Throne of Glory and of Light;  
Before him shall the Book be opened  Wherein are written the Supreme Laws.  And all the Splendours of the Heaven of God,  And all the Powers that be above the Heaven,  And all the Living Ones and Pure Intelligences  Shall stand around the Thrones of Judgment.  Then shall the hearts of the good rejoice  For the Day of Consummation hath arrived:  The prayer of the saints hath been heard;  The blood of the righteous hath not sued in vain.  

The march of guilt triumphant in its course  
Is stayed by a Hand of Lightnings:  
And the unchanging Institutes of God  
Pronounce the doom of the oppressor.  
Then shall arise the Fountain of Righteousness,  The Fountain from the Wells of Wisdom;  
The thirsty shall drink and enjoy knowledge;  They shall dwell with the paradise-ones.  
In that hour shall the Son of Man stand forth  Before the Shining Lord of Spirits:  
And his name shall be pronounced aloud  
In the presence of the Ancient of Days.  
Before the Sun and the Signs were ordained,  Or their courses were made for them;  
Before the Stars of Heaven were formed,  
Or Light heard a command,  
The Secret of the Son of Man was known  
In the heart of the Lord of Spirits.  
 * * * *  
 * * * *  
He shall be a support for all the righteous  
To lean upon him without stumbling;  
He shall be the Light of Nations  
And the hope of all who are in trouble.  
All who dwell on earth shall wait for him,  
And do the things that he ordains;  
They shall bless the Lord who sent him;  
They shall sing to the King of Spirits.  
Wouldest thou know his name?  
Soshiosh, the Saviour, is his name;  
His presence on the earth of man  

Is as the presence of Morning Light.  From God's presence did he go forth  A Messenger unto spheres of sorrow;  
He shall exist for ever when his work is done  He shall be in the presence of the Master,  He was concealed in God's splendour,  But he came forth from the Holy One,  To reveal the Institutes of the Spirit-Lord,  To those who pined in darkness.  
From the first he did exist in secret;  He was hidden—the Concealed One;  Not even to the Cherubic splendours  Was his mystic name known.  
He bears the Sceptre of Command;  
He bares the Sword of Conquest;  
Let the whole earth bow down;  
Its Pontiff and its Lord appears.  
In the days when this Apostle cometh  The kings and mighty ones of clay,  Who have gained their thrones by guilt,  Shall be abashed before the Divine Messenger.  
Who shall save their souls from death?  Who, but he, whose mission is of God?  Like hay in fire, and lead in water,  
Are the natures of the evil-hearted.  
They burn in the presence of the pure;  They sink down before the Holy ones;  Neither shall a tenth part of them be found  Or saved from the universal wreck.  The sword of the Lord of Spirits  

Shall be drunken with their impure blood;  
The Envoys shall bear them to punishment—  To the retribution due to guilt.  
Darkness gathered round us:  
Even the Starry Chair was lost in mist:  
Mists and clouds revolved like wheels;  
Hither, Fire and Water mingled.  
A Mountain-Cloud veiling every star  
Rose like a Whirlwind;  
Thunders rolled: lightnings glittered ;  
Yet still we passed along.  
Twelve Stones rising up like pillars  
I could discern amid the glancing fires:  
Girdled with walls of unhewn rock—  
On every stone the semblance of a Splendour.  