CHAPTER XXVI.  
1. And he said: Who will go? and I saw a Vision  (17)  
2. A Virgin more beautiful in her light and youth  than the illuminated circle of the heavens when it shines  in all the radiance of the stars.  
3. Winged was this Virgin, and clothed to the foot;  but her snow-white wings were glorified with the stars of  heaven.  
4. In her right hand was the palm branch; in her left  a mystic wand; she floated in purple light.  
5. And he said: Behold: and I saw another Vision.  We passed as it were from the gloom of night  Into the resplendent lustre of the morning;  
The golden clouds rolled in waves of glory—  Each seemed to carry a star in its breast.  
And sweet voices sang divine songs,  
And soft sounds descended like summer rain,  And out of a Cave hidden in deep recesses  
We heard archangelic hymns.  
6. And again he said, Behold, and the Vision passed.  The first was as a Man standing in the heaven; his left  arm was extended; in his right was a crook, and in his  hand were many stars.  
7. And after him appeared another Man; he wore the  starry robe and diadem of a king, and in his right hand  a whip.  
8. And there shone a third unclothed like Truth,  and in his hands a mighty starry serpent. And all the heaven was made splendid by the apparition of the  Man.  
9. And the fourth was as a Hero; his splendour was  that of an Archangel; he knelt; he bare arrows, and in  his right hand a club; with his left he crushed the three headed.  
10. And the fifth was in the strength of youth and  power. In his right hand a sacred scythe; in the left a  snaky head. His feet were winged; he sprang like light  through heaven. A glory of splendour illuminated every  limb.  
11. And there shone a sixth, the offspring of Phen.  He stood in heaven in cruciform shape; his air was  grave.  
12. After him I saw a terrible one; half man, half  horse. He strained a bow; he drew a mighty arrow. The  clouds rolled back in terror.  
13. Next I saw starry Twins; their brows, their  shoulders, and their limbs were gemmed with stars; one  held a harp; the other arrows.  
14. And I saw another, a terrible one; he also had  the head and front of Man; but the legs and body of a  war-horse. And he marched as a Conqueror. And he  was surrounded with light.  
15. And the eleventh was a Man of War; with mace  and shield and breast-plate; a starry giant. His belt was  splendour.  
16. And the Twelfth was as a youth, and on his brow  a star; his body and his limbs were radiant. And he  held an Urn reversed, and a stream of starry lustre was  poured out of the Urn down over the earth. And the  number of his glories was twelve times nine.   
17. And he said unto me, Twelve; and again he said:  Ten. And again he said: Light, Glory, Life. And I  heard a Song from Heaven; but I was lost in a sea of  mystery.  
O Sun-born! look thou upon this tablet;—  
It glittered with flashes of light;  
Twilight settled on its pages;  
Darkness was around it in clouds;  
I saw a Sceptre of Beauty;  
It waved like a beautiful palm tree;  
I saw an Arm of Might;  
Death followed its descent.  
Again a Cloud passed over me  
Glittering even as crystal,  
And the solar spirits of heaven  
Sang, as it were, a new song.  
Thou art fairer than the children of men,  
* In the Medal above the Holy Spirit is on the Golden Seat;  she holds in her hand the eight-pointed cross of the Buddhists,  the Manichæans, and the Mazonic Templars: an emblem which  proves that their esoteric creed was one and the same. It appears  in Beger. The Serpent is the Messenger.  

Grace is poured into thy lips:  
Therefore God hath blessed thee for ever.  
Gird thy sword upon thy thigh,  
O most mighty,  
In thy majesty; in thy power.  
In thy glory ride prosperously,  
Because of truth, and meekness, and judgment;  Thy right hand teacheth thee terrible things.  
Thine arrows are sharp,  
Sharp in the hearts of thine enemies;  
The multitudes fall beneath thee.  
Thy throne, O king, is for ever;  
Thy sceptre of thy kingdom;  
It is a hallowed sceptre.  
Thou lovest righteousness;  
Thou dost abhor iniquity;  
Therefore hath thy God anointed thee.  
All thy garments smell of myrrh,  
Aloes and cassia out of the ivory palaces,  
In these have they made thee beautiful.  
And I looked and saw an Army of Chariots,*  And men rode in them,  
And they came upon the wind from the East,  From the West also, and from the South.  
The sound of the noise of their chariots was heard;  
* This is the Cabir Progress through Heaven. The Medal re presents God sustaining the Holy Spirit, who offers the Crown  of Heaven to the Cabiric Daimon. See Part I, 601.  

The saints who were on earth perceived it;  
The pillar of the earth shook from its foundations;  The roaring was heard from earth even unto heaven.  
In their wheels was whirlwind,  
They moved along in thunders;  
As the roaring of young lions;  
As the roaring of the terrible sea.  
Then did they all fall down  
Worshipping the Holy Lord of Spirits:  
Blessed are ye, O saints, and pure of heart:  
Bright and glorious is your lot!  
Ye shall exist in the light of the sun;  
In the pure beam of everlasting life  
Whose days shall have no end;  
Neither shall the days of the saints be numbered,  Who seek light, and who obtain righteousness;  Peace be unto them with the Lord of the Universe.  For like the Sun hath Truth arisen,  
While the night of darkness hath passed away,  There shall be the Light which shines for ever  Beaming in increase before the King of Spirits.  
After these I beheld thousands of thousands,  
And myriads of uncounted myriads;  They stood before the Thrones of Heaven,  And sang to harps and flutes.  
On the four wings of the Thrones of Heaven;  On the four sides I saw others;  
Their names, their orders, their gradations,  Were announced to me by the Angel;  They blessed and praised the Lord of Glory;  The first Voice blessed Him for ever,  And the second Voice blessed the Messengers.  And those also who are martyrs for truth.  And the third Voice did entreat sweetly  For those who are in bondage on the earths,  Whose cry ascends from sorrowful hearts  In supplication to the Lord of Spirits.  And the fourth Voice said unto the satans  Depart ye; go accursed;  
Ye are forbidden from the Circle of the Lord,  Whose laws ye have ever polluted.  
These were Spirits of the Most High God  That spake in four Thunders;  
I heard the Voices of the Four  
As the voice of the sea in wrath. 

CHAPTER XXVII.  
From thence did I proceed towards the East  To a Mountain in a far off Sphere  
Its surface gleamed from a distance  Its heights were crowned with woods.  And waters gushed from its recesses,  And a cataract of many cataracts;  

It foamed like a living creature  
Amid trees, and clouds, and mists.  
Then went I onward from the Wilderness,  
Towards the eastern side of the Mountain;  
There were Trees of sweetly-smelling perfume,  Frankincense, and myrrh, and sandal.  
The beauty of each one of these Trees  
Was different from the beauty of all the others.  So infinitely varied are all the works  
That issue from the hand of God.  
And over all was the bright Mountain  
Elevated, like a silver firmament:  
Cassia breathed from all its pores,  
And sunshine sat upon its sides.  
Thence did I pass amid certain Lakes,  
Whose waters never failed;  
There was the Tree of Fragrance, Zakasinon,  Goodly among celestial gardens.  
Beside the Lakes were other Trees,  
Breathing cinnamon, but fairer than cinnamon;  And under their boughs celestial Spirits  
Sat and sang celestial psalms.  
I advanced farther unto the East;  
Here did I behold another Mountain;  
Trees of bloom thickly covered it;  
And pure Fountains rose and sparkled.  
And out of the green-blooming leaves  
The sweet Neketro* dews distilled;  
The trees were loaded like Almond Trees,  
* From this word the Hellenic word Nectar came.  

And their name in heaven is Alma.*  
Their fruit excelled all perfume;  
And all the sweetness of the earth’s produce;  And round them danced celestial Choirs  To the music of golden harps.  
And after these things as I looked forth  
Unto the shining of the Northern Gate,  
Which opened high above the Mountains,  I beheld Seven lofty places.  
They were filled with pure nard,  
And odoriferous forests of papyrus,  
And trees like cinnamon trees,  
And the blue and white lotos.  
From thence I passed above the Mountain peaks,  That shone like a sea of rainbows,  
Onward to the East, over an Ocean of Fire,  More splendent than the flame-west.  
And I wended far into another Sphere:  
And I saw a Spirit who guarded the Sea:  His name in Heaven is Za-ti-El,  
And he brought me to the Paradise Gate.  
O ye star-dwellers,  
How beautiful in your homes ye shine;  
Eagles of fire and Serpents of light amid the heavens:  Gleaming with a ray that exceeds the dawn.  Wisdom fills your spirit-souls;  
Ye follow in the thunder path of the sun;  And far below the birds of justice  
Fly, and do your bidding, O star-dwellers.  * So named after the Holy Spirit—the Tree of Life.  

The Spirit of the Rainbow shines from above,  And in her Silver Wheel is your orbit;  
Lightnings pass not with more rapid flight  
Than ye from west to east.  
Then did their song arise  
Around the Throne of Glory;  
It passed from circle into glowing circle;  
And went into the Supreme Presence.  
And they who were around that Throne,  
Rose and, knelt, and laid down their wands;  And waves, and winds, and all the fires of ether,  Came, and bowed themselves in song.  
I saw the Spirit of the white-bosom  
Glittering in virgin beauty amid the choirs,  
As the Moon over the waving Sea,  
As the Evening Star amid the forest leaves.  
Could I reveal unto thee  
The Mystery of the Sacred Mysteries;  
Then would thy soul upraise itself  
Like a Winged Serpent before the Lord God.  As the wind moves over the shining waters,  So would thy fire-spirit be impelled;  
It would bear thee on the lightnings,  
Like thunders would its wings rustle.  
But the mighty King of Fire;—  
By Him hath it been forbidden;  
I see His glittering Sword—  
It waves—it quivers—and I faint.  
From the White Throne a Voice comes;  
O thou child of the bosom of light,  

Stay, stay, murmur not:  
Why should the Sword descend? 

 
CHAPTER XXVIII.  
Flourishing was this shady Garden  With many trees fragrant and divine;  Their appearance was of varied beauty,  As the colours of the Holy City.  
The Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil  Was there also in the midst thereof;  It was like a tamarind tree  
Bearing fruit which resembled grapes.  Its perfume extended to a great distance;  It was surrounded with light:  
How beautiful is this Tree! I said,  
And how delightful is its appearance.  One of the glorious Spirits answered:  It is the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil,  Whereof the Essences that desire change  Partake, and straight they transmigrate.  For all the Spirits that live in the Universe  Are made free by God;  
They are endowed with full volition;  For this is not a land of slaves.  
As light and darkness are in the Kosmos  So also are the Beautiful and the Base;  They who incline to either are most free,  According to Eternal Ordinances.  
And they who desire the Beautiful only  Abstain wholly from the fruit of this Tree,  

And basking in the sunshine of the Divine,  
They dwell content in Heavenly Dream.  
But they who desire to attain knowledge,  
Whether it be good, or whether it be evil,  
As many great ones do and have done;—  
Taste of the fruit of this Tree.  
Then do they pass into other conditions,  
For thus only can knowledge be obtained;  
But great is the price they pay;  
The possession of the gem is fatal.  
As the highest Spirit before the Throne  
Could never know what it was to be a man,  Until he had taken on himself man’s condition,  And experienced all man’s phases of thought;  Therefore and unto this end for the freely-willing  This Tree groweth here:  
Whosoever shall desire to alter his condition  Let him taste of the fruit and it is done.  
God is the Diffuser of Love,  
Of Life also, and of Beauty;  
But if Death came not and made a change  
Even these might weary in the end.  
Then I lifted up my hands,  
And gave thanks unto the Holy and Great One;  Blessed art Thou, O Lord, O King,  
And great and hallowed is thy majesty.  
Lord of all the creatures of the Spheres—  
King of kings—God of the Unbounded,  
Whose reign, whose wisdom, whose love, whose laws,  Endure throughout ages of ages.  

For ever shall thy dominion last,  
And the renewal of thy Spirits unto light;  The Heavens are thy Throne for ever;  The stars are but thy lowly footstool.  Thou dost know all things;  
Thou dost hear all things;  
Nor is there aught in light or darkness  That stands concealed from Thee.  
Thou considerest the wants of every creature,  And takest heed that it may satisfy its want;  Whatever tends unto perfection  
That thou dost prepare for all.  
There is no place in heaven or in earth  That does not manifest thy boundless love;  There is no life throughout the Infinite  That shares not in thy loving thought.  
And I saw Three Splendours,  
And each impelled a chariot of steeds:  And the phantom of a Golden Vase  
Shone afar before the eyes of each.  
In the heaven above them was a cluster of lights;  The sun, the golden glory of stars,  
And a beam like that of the moon,  
And the Æther-Rainbow.  
The Seraphim—those gliding kings,  
And each was iris-girdled,  
And each glittered with a myriad eyes—  Lo! they followed in the bright track,  The Cherubim came in fire;—  
From the Golden Incense Altar;  

In their eyes the spirit of a power  
That pervades the vast Infinite.  
Thou hast seen the sun in storms;  
Even so was their serene grandeur,  
Or the moon after the battle;  
Even so was their calm light.  
Then the Ophanim passed rapidly,  
With the wind in their feet;  
These are solar kings;  
But I conceal their secret lore.  
And the bi-formed girdled with stars;  
And the six-winged with the sun-rays:  
* This Incense Altar, which is the Altar of the Apocalypse,  appears in a Medal by Beger, enshrining stars or worlds of light;  the legend is S. C., or Sancta Casa, and it appears in the shape of  a Tabernacle; See part I, 597, or Ark of the Covenant; Part II,  40, 63, 98, 108, 149, 540. In the other Medal is the Amreeta  Vase of the Waters of Life; the Magnet-Vase with the label S.  C., or Sacra Cymba, the Sacred Boat or Vessel; while the two  Olive Trees, seen in the Apocalypse, section 28 (Part I, 543; Part  III, 558), bloom in beauty at each side. E. X. is Euangelos  Chrestos: the Good Angel, the Anointed.  
 
Their swords glistened in the violet mist—  Their sceptres were as olive trees.  
Then did a Cloud snatch me up;  
The winds raised me above the Sphere;  They placed me in the Celestial Land  Upon a place of many thunders.  
There I saw another Vision;  
Palaces of the heavenly-pure;  
There did Spirits hymn to God;  
They interceded for the sons of men.  The sun bright Heaven flowed around.  Love and beauty were like dew:  
Righteousness flowered before their faces;  The bloom of light was over all.  
Thus shall it be with them for ages of ages.  With these countless, dazzling Spirits;  They dwell under the wing of the Eternal,  And sing in the measure of the stars.  They stand before Him like living fire;  Their mouths, a blessing, like sweet honey;  Their lips glorify the Supreme One,  And virtue shone through each.  
There was I desirous of remaining;  My spirit longed for its antecedent home;  Once, like these also, had I stood before God.  Then did I extol His Name.  
Blessed be He, and ever blessed,  
The Lord of the Star-bright Lands:  Wise, before the Universe was formed,  Wise, when all shall have passed away.  What are the earths? and what is man?  

And he who sleeps and praises Thee not?  
All are but as leaves that rot in winter;  
They have lived, and now they are no more.  But blessed in thy light are they  
Who without slumber stand before thy Throne;  They sing unto the Lord of Purity  
Who fills the Universe of Life with love.  

CHAPTER XXIX.  
There are Three Mystical Fountains,  
And over them Twelve Trees bend,  
Making music like sweet harps  
When they tremble to the silver touch.  
Out of their depths Dawn arises;  
The Dawn of the primary beam;  
Light rushes over their depths;  
But oh! what is that LIGHT?  
The Eagles cried, the Serpents rose,  
Like flames of fire into the Sun,  
And I saw the gleam of the Most Ancient:—  WORSHIP GOD ALONE.  
What divides the Spirit from the Soul—  
The splendent flame from the smoke;  
What is the light of the eye?  
What is the vivid force of the heart?  
I see a White Fountain  
Flowing in the midst of shrubs;  
I see a Rainbow touch the earth;  
Yet it is not of the earth.  
Version 20180823
294 THE BOOK OF GOD. 
The Moon is in the mid-heaven,  
Yet is she not the surrounding air;  
The pulse of nature is in the ocean,  
Yet the ocean is not nature.  
There saw I an Island of Fire,  
Rivers of Flame poured out of its depths,  And many Spirits bright as waves  
Mingled beautifully with the golden lightnings.  In the midst I saw a Throne  
Shining like a white Star of Beauty;  But it gleamed amid solemn silence;  Darkly-silent—darkly-splendid.  
And in the front a Silver Sea;  
And at its feet Seven Rivers,  
And round its arch Seven Rainbows,  And at the sides were Silver Wheels.  Voices of Waves and mystic Waters  Echoed all around that Throne:  
And I saw Pillars of resplendent lustre,  And I heard Trumpets that spake of God.  Men passed with musical harps;  
Men passed with gleaming swords,  
As fishes in the sea,  
So did they glide amid oceans of fire.  Who are these? the Angel said:  
I said, My Lord, thou knowest;  
He looked at me with piercing eyes:  Thou also, O Enoch, art not ignorant.  They passed like evening clouds,  
Mild and bright, and vivid;  
Over the hills of darkness;  

Into green plains.  
The eagles cried with joy;  
The thunders leaped—they laughed;  Bring back the many unto God  
Blessed is he who bringeth even one.  
Clothe thee in thy blue girdle.  
O Son of Prayer,  
Tremble not; let not thine eyes roll;  
Beat not in heart, nor let thy words falter.  I will show thee the secrets of the Deeps—  The mystic song of the Ancient;  
It was murmured in the Dark  
Before the mountain streams rolled in light.  He shall come upon the shores of the world;  He shall draw his dominion over them,  Thrice, thrice, thrice;  
But they will not hearken unto Him.  Deeply moving in its mighty strength  Is the blue-green Adi;  
Who shall escape the volume of gloom  Who shall flee from the billowy flame of death?  The Lord of Thunders rises,  
The Sovereign of Lightnings and of Fires;  He looses the chain;  
I see His chariot in the dark violet mists.  O Lady of Beauty!  
O sparkling Queen of Stars!  
The sea rises in its terrors;  
Like glittering spears are its foaming waves.  Four times the thunders snorted  
Like steeds of battle in their rage;  

The Nine with diadems of pearl  
Entreated: Stay the broad-breasted:  
But it comes; it rolls like mountain steeds  Terrible with hoofs and necks of smoke:  I saw the Power of the pale-gleaming—  His sword fell, and all was death.  
Shall I unfold the Mysteries of Light?  The secrets of the Ocean-Stream?  
Shall I unveil the Beam of Heaven  
That like the Green Rainbow moves over the sea?  The Sons of Fire come forth;  
The pride-winged Dragons of the Skies;  They glittered in the golden stream of clouds;  They said: O Messenger, stay thee;  
Let not thy voice go forth  
To reveal the dark secrets,  
And the stars twinkled in a dim splendour  Saying: unto my spirit: Stay.  
Even in light there are secret recesses  Where the spirit seeks repose,  
As the sun sinks into clouds  
To re-appear more beautifully.  
There music lulls them,  
And the rustle of the mystic forests,  
And the Soul-Illuminator comes and gleams  In pictures of serene loveliness.  
The gentle words of books prevail  
Over the sea of wandering thoughts,  
And dreams like spring showers  
Bathe them in a dew of light.  
In an alcove green with palm trees,  
  
Shaded from the heaven-sun,  
I sank, wearied with the brightness  
That lay upon my dazzled spirit.  
An Egg, more beautiful than the Sun  
When in the sparkling West he sinks,  
Gleamed, as if it shone amid ten thousand rainbows  Of the most pure and dazzling light;  
But quick as the whirl of a sword  
In the hand of a young hero,  
It shone—it revolved—it vanished;  
It was a momentary glimpse of the Universe.  
Flowing are the streams of fire  
Over which the Eagle-Angels soar;  
From the mountains rush torrents of flame—  The forest trees are pillars of light.  
In their white robes of splendent glory  
The Ancients pass amid the whirl;  
The Voice of Beauty sounds  
And smooths the dark-red billows.  
O ye Mystic Fountains—  
Three Sources of the Primary Worlds,  
Rising into light like morning beams,  
Let me bathe my spirit in your blue.  
We passed the troubled whirlpools of fire;  
Many dark Wanderers we saw,  
Garmented they were in black;  
Their faces were sunless.  
But far off in the distance we saw Vales,  
And the altar fires of the Mysteries;  
There did the bright Isarim pray;  

The groves echoed with their psalms.  
Like white stars moving in light  
They circled round the Serpent-Shrine,  And raised their arms of snow  
In adoration of the Silent Lightnings.  
I stood in silence amid those star-courses;  I longed to see the Holy Sanctuary;  
Streams of rushing fire rolled around;  The winged lightnings quivered.  
From East to West, from North to South  It seemed one vast and splendid sea of flashes,  As if it were a furnace ever quivering  
With clouds of new-born lustre.  
Come thou, unto the Waters of the Sun;  Bathe thee in its splendent fountain,  
And on thy thigh receive the visible sign  That marks the true Apostle.  
Swift as a star I was borne onward  
Into that Sea of Light—  
And there transfigured in a dream  
I was bathed in mists and clouds.  
And now I moved as in a dark dream;  The Serpent of the Spheres was coiled around me;  We wandered as in fiery mist,  
Yet was there a sound of sweet music.  Afar off, in a Cloud of Rainbows,  
He showed me the Ambrosial City,  
Girdled with a choir of gleaming suns;  This is the Abode of the Celestial.  
And I saw a Hand lustrous in its beauty,  And it held the Morning Star;  
 
This is the clothing of the Sons of Heaven—  She raised it, as though She did present.  
Eagle of the fiery wood,  
Thus spake he in mine inner ear.  
There are Twelve Children of Light  
Who shall go forth from the Halls of Flame.  The first-born shall dispel the darkness  
Which, like a night, looms over the multitudes;  The last Messenger, the true and faithful,  
Shall flash the beauty of the rainbow.  
Phani is his name;  
An oak of trembling leaves and branches:  
But the forest trees shall listen  
To the melody of its waving boughs.  
He spake and sank into the Sun,  
And the Sun gleamed with double glory,  
But the echo of his mystic speech  
Bang in thunder through my spirit.  
Slowly over the calm waters  
Came the Spirit of Thrones;  
Her long white robe flowed to her feet;  
In her hand the Silver Circle.  
The stars followed in her train like servants;  The Sun and Moon bowed down:  
Amen! Amen!  
This was all I heard,  

CHAPTER XXX.  
Another Vision then did I behold:  
Clouds invited me; a Mist embraced me;  
The stars glittered and moved in splendour; 
Flashes of lightning impelled me forward,  And winds accelerated my ascent.  
They elevated me higher and higher,  
Where I beheld a wall built with stones of crystal;  A belt of fire surrounded it,  
And my heart was filled with terror.  
I entered into this quivering flame,  
And drew nigh unto a mighty Palace;  Its walls and pavements were of crystal,  Every stone was of a fiery brightness.  And in the roof the stars wandered  
With a restless, agitated light,  
And tongues of fire and lightning flashes  Darted through its spacious halls,  
And there were Cherubim of a flame-splendour,  Like meteors in a starry sky;  
A dazzling flame burned in its battlements;  The Gates were flame also.  
And when I entered into this place,  
Behold it was hot as fire and cold as ice;  Every symbol of delight was there;  
But terror overpowered my spirit:  
My heart beat—my heart trembled;  
A fearful agitation seized me;  
I fell upon my face and was sore afraid,  Yet I looked the Vision in the eyes.  
And behold I saw another Habitation  
More vast and splendid than the first,  
And all its mighty Gates were wide open,  And it stood firm in the midst of ever-rolling fire.  It is impossible to describe its glory,  
 
Or its awful vast and boundless magnitude,  So greatly did its wondrous structure excel in all things,  Whatsoever the thought of man is able to conceive.  Its floor was pure dazzling flame;  
Above were flashing lightnings and tongues of fire;  And darting, agitated stars were there.  
And the dome was an intolerable splendour.  And in the centre I saw a Throne.  
Azure-white it was like sun-illumined ice;  
Its circle was the circumference of the sun’s orb,  And songs and hymns of Seraphim were heard.  And underneath this mighty Throne,  
Rivers of red fire flowed:  
To look upon the lustre was impossible;  
To gaze and live was a forbidden thing—  
ONE great in mystery sat upon it,  
Whose robe was brighter than the sun;  
Whiter than snow it glittered;  
More dazzling in its colours than an ice-mountain.  No spirit could look upon the face  
Of this Being, the Glorious—the Effulgent;  No mortal could behold that Light  
Except within the trance of vision;  
A fire of flaming fire was around;  
A fire of flaming fire rose up before,  
So that of the myriad myriads that circled the Throne  Not one could go nigh.  
But the Divine requires not holy counsel,  
Nor the advice of the wise of heaven,  
Yet did not the pure Spirits who were around and near  
Depart one moment from that Glory.  
They went not from that glorious glowing Presence,  For there is Paradise effused.  
There did I veil my face;  
I advanced with trembling awe;  
My heart quivered as I went.  
Then the Divine called me, saying:  
Approach hither, Eඇඈർඁ, at my bidding,  
And I was raised up even unto the entrance,  But my eye was fixed on the ground;  
Then addressing me the Voice spake,  
Hear thou me—neither be thou afraid;  
Approach hither and hearken!  
Unto the fallen ones of earth descend!  
I looked, and in the hand of God I saw  
Flowers—his beautiful sceptre;  
I looked again, and saw lightnings,  
These also as a sceptre did He wield.  
Then the Seraphim, the Cherubim, and Ophanim,  Were seen, the sleepless Splendours of the Most High;  Who know not rest, repose, or slumber,  
But watch the Throne of God for ever.  
And I beheld Angels, innumerable thousands,  Myriads of myriads in that House of Fire—  With them was the Beautiful One  
Whose robe was glory indescribable.  
And the Twenty-Four Ancients,  
Borne in chariots of flame;  
Thunders pealed—lightnings glittered  
As they marched in the sun-paths!  
Then did I fall prostrate  

While all my flesh dissolved away:  
My spirit also became changed.  
I was transfused into a shining star.  
Oceans of fire commingled with oceans of waters: I  saw their whitely-shining waves advance in sunlight  beautiful as an army of swans.  
Over and upon them innumerable blessed Spirits, and  some were winged, and some were wingless, but all were  lovely.  
And streams of song and melody were heard; the  sweet accents of golden harps, and of voices chaunting  the love of God, and of the beauty that abides in  heaven.  
O ye Dwellers amid the Stars,  
Who move on billows of lucid fire  
Borne amid the wild music of the Spheres,  
Amid the sweet echoes of the sea.  
Ye are Angels—Angels of the Waters—  
Hear the harp-string of my trembling soul;  
Give me of your sacred wisdom  
That I may teach the earth-wanderers.  
May God protect you, they answered:  
Receive this holy Wand,  
And with it mark the sons of men  
With the heavenly token of the One.  
Another Splendour now I saw;  
The Spirits of this high heaven:  
They answered unto their names one by one  As the Voice of God called them.  

God spake, and the Spirits heard Him;  Unto each was light allotted in that moment;  Light according to the lustre of his works;  For splendour generates splendour,  And I saw the Spirits transfused;  
They transmigrated into the Beautiful;  They mingled with the Celestial Intelligences  That shone around the Thrones of Infinity.  Splendour issued from these splendid ones  As light from the sun and stars:  
Never is its beauty dimmed;  
It is the essence of their own nature.  
The Lord of Spirits sat upon his Throne;  The Spirit of Beauty was over Him;  Lightnings came from his lips;  
Sinners saw them, and they perished.  But to the Holy Essences of Heaven,  Who received the commandments of God,  A combined power, multiform, myriad eyes,  Voices, splendours like fire were given.  And they all hymned before Him,  
As if with an united song:  
Blessing, glorifying, exalting—  
Him, the One, the Holy One of Ages.  And every Power that is in Heaven,  And all the Pure Intelligences,  
The Cherubim, the Seraphim, the Ophanim;  All the Spirits of Power:  
And all the Mighty ones of Wisdom  Raised their sacred hymns of light,  And love, and praise, before the Father.  

Blessing, glorifying Him, the Holy.  
Blessed art Thou, O Lord!  
And may thy Name be praised for ever:  
All who are in Heaven bless it:  
All the Holy among Celestials praise it.  
All the Pure who dwell in Paradise;  
Every Spirit that lives in light,  
Every mortal who hath known truth  
Glorifies thy Name for ever and ever.  
Great is thy benevolence, O Lord,  
And thy power from generation to generation;  Thy majesty and magnificence—how great they are;  Deep are all thy mysteries.  
