CHAPTER XXI.  
And after these things I was transfused;  
Ascending far into the Heavens  
I beheld the sons of the Celestial Spheres  
Treading gloriously on flames of fire.  
Their garments were of pure white;  
Their faces were transparent amber;  
I saw two Rivers of Fire glittering like hyacinth,  And I fell on my face before the Lord of Spirits.  And one of the Star-clothed took me by the hand;  He raised me up—he brought me to the Mercy-Seat—  He showed me all the hidden mysteries:  
The receptacles of the Stars, their fiery splendours.  The light wherein they did go forth in flame,  
 
From before the faces of the Divine,  
And he concealed me in the Morning Star.*  After that I beheld in a Vision of Light  
A palace raised with stones of diamond;  
And in the midst of the eye-dazzling stones  
I beheld tongues of living flame.  
And as I looked upon the orbit of this House of Fire  I saw at one of its extremities  
That there were Rivers full of flaming fires  
Which ran around encircling it on all sides.  
After this I saw another Heaven;  
A paradise of multiform mansions;  
And the divisions of a Celestial City,  
And an order of Spirits different from the others.  I saw the measure of all human actions  
As they are judged by the wise and pure:  
Differing much from the standard of the unwise,  As it is set up as a guide to mortals.  
I saw also Palaces of the Pure Intelligences,  Ever-flashing Halls and Temples;  
Beauty that cannot be described;  
Glory that cannot be painted.  
From thence I went towards the extremities of the  Sphere; there saw I many Living Creatures, they  were unlike aught I had ever seen, and each was  different from the other. And winged Shapes vari 
ous in their forms, and with a voice of many changing melodies; and they dwelt around silver waterfalls; Mystic  were the echoes in that region. And looking eastward  I perceived the boundaries of this vast and flame-girt  Flower-sphere; impassable oceans of rolling light, unto  which the Gardens of Heaven extended not. The Gates  of Heaven stood wide open; I saw the Stars come forth;  I numbered the Celestial Ministers as they issued from  the vast portal. I wrote them down according to their  order—their names also did I record; I marked their  times and seasons while the Children of Paradise waved  their wings. The Spirits who were with me named them;  hailing each new Splendour by his title; mighty they  were; their works were mighty; they were Messengers  whom God sends forth. From thence I advanced onwards  in a mist of fire unto the North, to the terrestrial points  of this immense Sphere, where I beheld a glorious won der. For there I saw the Heavenly Gates which lead  direct unto the Celestial; immense in fearful magnitude  and beauty; the ever-flashing lightnings wreathed them.  Three of them were open and distinctly marked; from  these tempests did rush forth, bearing on wings of dark ness, cold and hail, and frost and snow: Dew also, and  rains they carried, and the flame of a fierce fire which  blew violently from those haughty Gates upon all terres trial things. They swept them headlong into ruin; the  Wind Sendo was there; dreadful with fiery whirling  wings, as the collected force of many tempests. Nothing  of a sensual or carnal nature, such as the Children of  Sin are, could stem that irresistible torrent:—they were  hurled headlong into Wildernesses.

* The hierophants at the close of their sacred ceremonies in  the Mysteries, in allusion to this, exclaimed: We have found him  (the Messenger) Concealed in the embraces of the Sun. Landseer’s  Sabæan Res. 196.  
  
But the Children of Purity felt it not;  
They passed through the Cataract of Flame,  Gliding with an easy motion  
As fishes glide through billows.  
From this place I wandered on to the extremities of  the Sphere westward, wherein also I did behold Three  Heavenly Gates open. They were as those which I had  before seen beaming like suns in the far north, and from  these also a rushing Ocean of winds and wonders flashed.  Then we went onward unto another region, where I saw  in the West a Holy Mountain; a strong Mountain and a  vast, and four delightful places like Gardens. Internally  it was deep, broad, and smooth, as if it had been shaped  by a heavenly hand; it was great and beautiful to look  upon, and my heart melted away. And the Lion-Spirit  who was with me said: These are dwellings of the  Pure in Heart; for such were they made; here shall they  be gathered; these bowers shall be their’s until the Secret  Day.  
From these depths of fire I speak unto mortals,  And from the heart of glowing streams:  
Beautiful are the strains I hear;  
I seek to waft their echoes unto earth.  
O men! venerate God:  
He alone is worthy of supreme devotion;  
In his mighty hand He wields  
The vast unbounded starry Universe.  
He holds the measuring line;  
The sun beams out of His eyes;  
The whitely-foaming sea is His;  
The winds come and go as He commands.  
His song goes forth over the Kosmos;  
 
It is the great Song of Songs;  
Blessed are they who in the blasts and storms  Hear and recognise that mystic melody.  
All would perish were He not near;  
He it is who guides the Wanderer:  
Who rules it by the shining kings of night:  
Who holds it by the golden lord of day.  
Blessed be this Great and Holy One,  
Unto the everlasting age of ages;  
Let all the living, all the dead,  
Bow down and join in worship of His Name.  

CHAPTER XXII.  
Many are the Mansions in the kingdom of Heaven—  Celestial spheres more gorgeous than the sun,  Wherein the Spirits of Divine Love dwell  
As thou mayest see the fruits upon a spreading tree.  And there are angelical Spheres of Light  
More radiant than the rainbow’s orb,  
Wherein the loveliness of God is felt  
By all who are the inhabitants thereof,  
And into these ascend the Spirits of men  
Who pass from earth in purity and truth;  
Who have aspired after the Wisdom of God,  And clothed their souls in wisdom.  
Man when first he passeth out of human life  Awakens as if from clouded dream;  
A glory of celestial splendour surrounds him;  He dreams that he is in a Vision of Beauty.  
But opening his eyes, and stretching forth his limbs,  He finds that he is a living spirit;  
He sees his soul around him like a garment,  But he is wholly destitute of the corporeal body.  And he is sorely troubled and affrighted;  He knows not whither he is going;  
He floats through an ethereal ocean;  
He feels himself wafted on a wind.  
But lifting up his ever pure thoughts  
To the Most High God of his adoration,  Who hath been unto him while in the flesh  His Father, his Comforter, his Guide,  
He becomes filled with a heavenly peace.  He perceives a harmony in all his sensations;  His soul and spirit glide like a musical hymn  Through a sea of sparkling bliss.  
Then does he look upon all surrounding objects;  He sees them distinctly in their pure light,  Revealed in sun and star-shine  
Like the flashing gleams of the firmament.  And ever and ever as the celestial splendours  Beam from above, brightly and more bright,  And his chaste thoughts are uplifted to his Father,  The High, the Holy, and the Divine;  
He beholdeth around him, like a circle of sunbeams,  A beautiful Choir of Sacred Spirits,  
From whose most glowing presence is effused  A perfume sweeter than violets.  
Spirits of Love,  
Spirits of Truth,  
Spirits of Knowledge,  
Spirits of Wisdom,  
Spirits of Charity,  
Spirits of Pureness,  

Spirits of Light, and  Spirits of God.  


From these transcendent forms is poured forth  A radiancy so divine and dazzling  
That it outshines the eyes of the sun  
When they glow with hottest beam.  
And these Spirits by their celestial nature  
Behold the very essence of the Man:  
They penetrate the recesses of his inward thought;  They know at a glance all his desires.  
And unto these, according to their properties,  The blessed Spirits incline themselves:  
For the Spirits of Love conjoin with him  
Whose spirit hath ever been founded in love;  And the Spirits of Truth conjoin with him  
Whose spirit hath ever been founded in truth:  And the Spirits of Charity welcome him,  
Whose spirit hath ever been founded in charity.  For like seeketh its like in Heaven,  
Even as like seeketh its like on earth;  
And the pure avoid the opposite to purity  
In the celestial as well as in the terrene spheres.  Therefore, whatsoever virtue man soweth  
In his frail and transitory life of clay,  
The same reapeth he a thousand fold  
When he transmigrates into the heavenly life.  For the mystic sympathy which pervades the Universe  Immediately unites him to those that he resembles;  And the antipathy that exists between light and its  opposite  
Detaches him from aught that is not in unison with his  desires.  

And all the dwellers in those Blessed Places  Participate in the beatitude of the newly-come;  Perceiving an increase in their own happiness  By the happiness of this new member of their Circle.  Then do the Spirits ascend into a glorious Paradise;  There are Trees of an everlasting loveliness  Green and lofty and widely spreading;  
Flowering with many thousand blossoms.  And there are Bowers of delicious verdure,  And herbage fragrant with the breath of morning;  And Fountains purer than the crystal spar,  Flow in melody around those Trees;  
And Choirs innumerable of Angelic Spirits  Brighter than light glide amid the Paradise;  Breathing music, effusing beauty,  
And linked like starry constellations.  
A thousand rainbows glitter in the firmaments  And display their many-shining colours:  Lightnings vibrate along the ground,  
Like streams of running water.  
The mansions in this Heavenly Land  
Gleam with many treasures;  
They are made of precious stones;  
They are encrusted with golden flowers.  They are ceiled and paved with diamond  That glitters with sun-form irradiations,  
Which change a thousand times a minute  More splendid than the auroral light.  
The loveliness of these Celestial Palaces  Is in harmony with the loveliness of the Spirits,  Who in purity abide therein,  
Aspiring ever after more seraphic places.
For as Virtue is the most beautiful of all things,  The transcendant Image of God himself;  
Therefore is it agreeable to the Laws of Justice  That these mansions should be worthy of the Spirits.  Thus are the Palaces of Paradise magnificent,  And not a void and vacant atmosphere;  
For the dwellings of the Heavenly-beautiful  Are like themselves heavenly-beautiful also.  Think not that Spirits wander at random,  
As some do heedlessly suppose,  
Flying through the vast and empty air  
For no fixed purpose, and with no-certain home.  But this, indeed, is not the condition of the Blessed;  Their palaces are majestic structures;  
They have Gardens, Rivers, and Fountains,  
And all things are in harmony with their greatness.  And some are of a snow-white diamond like Truth,  And some of a transparent emerald like Wisdom;  For the god-like dwell in god-like places  
Whose brightness is a symbol of the indweller.  
Thus the Intelligences of the Supercelestial  
Know at a glance the properties of the inhabitants,  By the star-bright aspect of their homes,  
And the appearances that correspond therewith.  And even so in like manner  
The habitations of the wicked correspond with the  wicked;  
For fallen spirits congregate together  
According to their various tempers and qualities.  Thence emerging in the Cyclic Period  
They become again conjoined with souls and bodies, 

Passing into spheres of existence  
From which they must arise, or lapse lower still.  But many are the years of their wanderings  Before they are united with the psychical form;  Therefore the sat-wânas herd together  
In chaotic places, without a glimmer of light.  For as vice is the most detestable of all things:  Delighting in blood and filthiness and falsehood;  Hating all light, and burrowing in darkness,  And odious in its conceptions and designs;  Even so are the mansions of the sat-wânas  Wholly analogous to their evil properties,  And here they are like clouds of dust;  
Destitute of all power, or strength, or vigourousness.  The Universal Law of God,  
That like shall follow after like;  
Extends itself into those regions  
Which assimilate themselves to their inhabitants.  For no gleam of light shines there,  
But all is mist and gloom perpetually,  
Consonant with the qualities of the wicked,  Whose minds are nests of scorpions.  
And as the consciences of wicked men on earth  Present before them dreadful phantoms,  And terrible shapes, and fantasies, and forms,  Arise from the fumes of their guiltiness;  Haunting them in sleep and in the twilight hour  With many threatening shapes and gestures;  The offspring of a gloomy imagination  
That fears yet cleaves to its illusion  
Even so in these chaotic places  
The conscience-stricken wanderers of sin
Generate for themselves evil sights and appearances,  Corresponding to the sinfulness of their natures.  These appearances exist not in reality;  
For God creates no monsters;  
But unto the disordered minds of the fallen  
They appear in the vividness of life.  
This is the state of that which is called HELL;  Which God, indeed, hath not formed;  
Neither banisheth He his spirits thereunto;  
But their evil tendencies gather them together;  And their evil natures generating dreams  
Horrible and dark, and breathing torture,  
Surround them with the most lacerating agonies,  Not less terrible because self-inflicted.  
These sat-wânas are wholly without power;  They are confined within their own spheres;  Neither can any one arise therefrom  
Until the Cycle hath rolled through its years.  Then they assume souls or bodies,  
And are again developed in existence,  
To raise themselves, or plunge again  
Into the ocean of their self-made darkness.
  
CHAPTER XXIII.  
From thence I went into another place  
Far towards the West, near the end of the Sphere:  There did I behold a fire blazing:  
A rolling burning Torrent of Flames.  
It ceased not in its course by day,  
Nor did the night stay its mighty current,  
But ever like the ocean stream it flowed;  

And its roar was as the roar of an elephant.  
Then did I enquire, saying:  
What is this which ceases not?  
And one of the Holy Spirits answered,  
Whispering low into mine ear:  
This fire which runs for ever to the west  
Is the fontal fire of the Luminaries of Heaven;  They drink its brightness and are renewed;  
They feed on ever-flashing flame.  
I went from thence into another region,*  
And saw a Mountain from which fire flowed,  Ever burning, never ceasing;  
The skies were lightened by its splendours.  
I went near, and saw Seven other Mountains,  Each different from each in grandeur,  
Of brilliant gems, beautiful and precious,  
All magnificent and gorgeous to the eye.  
These Mountains rose in the eastern quarter,  Piled like clouds, one upon the other;  
Three Mountains uplifted themselves to the south,  Welded together in a similar manner.  
Deep valleys wound their way between,  
Separated by limpid rivers;  
And the Mountain of Fire was in the midst;  
And all were as the arch of a throne.  
Odoriferous trees grew thickly over them;  
And there was One Tree of divine fragrance;  Nor was there in the whole Paradise-Garden  A perfumed Tree which smelt like this.  
* See Vol. I. 215. On a pillar at Somnauth was inscribed:  This place resembles the Holy Mountain. Bombay Transactions  ii. 20. Som-Naut is Sun-God.  

Its leaf, its flower, its bark never withered.  
Its fruit was beautiful as the stars,  
And gathered like the clustering palm,  
Which welcomes the desert wanderer.  
Its leaves were emeralds set in gold;  
Its fruit was honey-wine and roses.  
Looking upon it, I cried aloud:  
How goodly is this blooming Tree!  
Then did one of the Spirits say,  
Why art thou delighted with this Tree?  
And why art thou inquisitive to know it?  
Thou hast passed by many things without enquiry,  But this has roused thy wonder.  
Then did I reply, saying:  
Concerning all things I desire knowledge,  
But most of all concerning this Tree,  
Whose beauty is more blooming than the Sun.  He answered, saying: Yonder Mountain,  
Whose peaks are like the Thrones of God,  
Shall be the Seat whereon shall sit the Holy One  When he shall arise to visit the earths.  
And that Tree of an exquisite fragrance,  
Breathing not a breath of carnal odour,  
Shall not be touched of any until the Secret Day,  When it shall be given to the Sons of Heaven;  Its essence shall be bestowed upon the Blessed;  For spirit-life within this Holy Place  
Shall flower for ever as in a Garden,  
Planted northward, unto the King of Heaven,  The Lord of Life and Beauty everlasting.  
Then shall they greatly rejoice in the Holy One;  An odour of delight shall pass through them;  

They shall exist in a life of light,  
Nor shall sorrow darken their days.  
And I blessed the Lord, Eternal in the Heavens,  Because He had prepared this Paradise Tree,  To give it to the Beautiful as their food,  
When He shall reveal himself in pure light.  
O man! what is the end of all thy labour, and all thy  trouble after gold and treasures? a short and transitory  and vain enjoyment; and then, thou art snatched from  them for ever. Would the wise man toil for prizes such  as these? achieved by great labour, and when achieved  laid down; would he link his spirit and body to corruption, for things that endure but for a brief moment? But  thou—uplift thy thoughts above the fading earth; con template in sublime dream the God of Heaven; prepare  thy spirit for its future existence, when it hath wakened  from the swoon of mortality. The term of thine exist ence approaches fast, and death, the end of all things, is  close at hand; awake! arise! before the final blow be  struck, for in the grave there is no hope. The most  exquisite delight of worldly enjoyment is like a draught  of sea-water to the thirsty; but the calmly-flowing hap piness of Eternity may be thine if thou wilt live a Child  of God.  
O God, thou art a great mystery;  
Yet still shall I adore Thee alone;  
Unto Thee my spirit turns,  
Whitely-shining amid the fire.  
The bright gleam of thy Glory lights the Universe,  All other lights are but shadows.  
Thy Voice sounds, and like a mighty trumpet
Its godlike energy commands the All.  
Look upon this Æthereal Tree, he said, once more,  Its flowers of pure gold in the rustling air;  
Its blossoms lovely as the moon,  
Its branches like clear crystal.  
Hearken! as its leaves sing  
Like harp-strings gently touched by the wind;  Beams of fire flash out of its trunk,  
And glide around its gnarled roots.  
Oh! how blessed of God are they  
Who dwell for ever in the shade of this Tree,  And sing and dance within its circle,  
And pour the hymn of praise.  
Illusion clouds them not;  
Nor does the mist of doubt assail them;  
The Holy shine on them with faces of love;  They breathe in most serene light.  

CHAPTER XXIV.  
From thence I proceeded to the middle Sphere, and I  beheld a happy and fertile Garden; the trees continually  sprouted new branches, and clustering wreaths of deli cious fruitage. There I saw a Sacred Mountain, and  under it, on the east, were Sweet Waters, which flowed  like light unto the golden-coloured south, making in their  course divine melody. I saw also in the east another  Mountain, tall and stately as the first; it rose into the  flashing sky, like a minaret of God’s house. Between  both were deep Valleys, through which also waters  flowed, onward ever unto the western side, where they  blended in one mighty Lake.  

White as the foam of seas,  
I saw the waving wings of Cherubim;  
Their feet were clothed in thunders;  
And so they rolled in light.  
The Seven in darkly-blue chain  
Passed, and reared their shining spears;  
They gleamed, they flashed, like flowers in lakes;  The war-cloud covered them.  
Mighty were they who passed,  
They carried stars like torches;  
Their robes glittered like the sea-waves  
When the full splendour of the sun illuminates them.  But on their thighs were golden swords,  And on their heads were helmets of diamond;  They shone like the wandering lights of the north,  The mystic, the inexplicable flashers.  
Thence I proceeded southward in my flight  To the extremities of this mighty Sphere;  There also I beheld Three Heavenly Gates;  Their stupendous portals were wide open.  Blazing torrents rushed through them,  
With rapid flight, as if in fear;  
And out of every leaping eddy  
Flashes of lightning gleamed.  
Thence also I proceeded quick  
To the extremities of the Sphere outwards;  There were three Heavenly Gates  
Wide open unto the Orient.  
Within them I saw three smaller Gates  
Of an exquisite and perfect beauty;  
Through these Spirits of Heaven passed,  
Proceeding by a path which they alone saw.  They were brighter than stars in their light;  
They were resplendent as pure morning air;  And when I saw them, I adored Gඈൽ  
For the Celestial Vision which He shewed.  
Every time I saw them, my heart panted  
With a rapture of thanks to the Lord of Glory,  Who had formed these splendid signs,  
That they might shew the magnitude of His works.  That all in heaven and under heaven  
Might know and glorify His creations;  
That all who do behold His power  
May ever bless His Holy Name.
  
CHAPTER XXV.  
After these things I was alone:—  
Alone amid those flaming orbs,  
I was rapt in mystic thought,  
As I floated in a sea of stars;  
Then I saw an Angel of brightness  
Whose glory exceeded that of the sun.  
He came and seized me by the hand.  
And I said, Who art thou? and what is thy name?  and he said, Rise up. And I said, Whither wilt thou  cause me to ascend? And he said, When I have shewn  thee Visions, then thou shalt understand who I am.  From the Seventh Heaven above the sun have I  descended unto this sphere, that I may raise thee before  the faces of Him whom the Universe delights to look  upon. Then we arose into the Ether. We saw the dwellers of that place: in many things it corresponded  with the earth of mortals; for all that is beneath is a coun terpart of what is on high. Then we arose farther into the  first Heaven; there I beheld a Throne in the midst, and  Spirits were upon the right hand and the left; and they  glorified him who sat upon the Throne.  
And I looked, if I could behold any sitting there,  But a Splendour of Light was over and about it,  And I could not see any form,  
But I heard the music of those who glorified.  Then I said unto the Angel,  
To whom is this praise addressed?  
He answered, To the Splendour who is in the Seventh  Heaven;  
He is here, but He is not visible;  
And also to the Beloved One,  
Who hath sent me unto thee.  
Then he raised me higher still,  
Into the second Heaven,  
Separated from the first Heaven,  
As far as the earth also is separated from it.  
There I beheld a Throne;  
Beautiful spirits were on the right and on the left;  And a Splendour dazzling to behold  
Wrapped the Throne in star-clouds.  
Great was the majesty of the second Heaven,  And the splendour of its angels ten-fold.  
And I fell upon my face to worship the Splendour;  But the Angel suffered me not, saying:  
Worship not the Visible,  
Nor the Throne, though of celestial brightness; 
Reserve thy homage for Him alone  
Whom thou shalt see in the time to come.  
For above all the heavens and their angels  
That Throne is placed;  
There is its Veil and Crown:  
These with thine eyes thou shalt behold.  
Think not that thou shalt not see Him face to face,  For they who love Him rise up in His presence;  The Holy Spirit, the Loved One, beareth them  Even in her bosom before the Supreme Lord.  Then he raised me higher still  
Into the third Heaven of all-beauteous light;  There also were innumerable Angels  
Upon the right hand and upon the left.  
They raised hymns of praise  
Before the Lord of Beauty, whom they worshipped;  Invisible was He amid the Splendour;  
I saw only Light immeasurable.  
No record of earthly things,  
No remembrance of the bodily is there;  
It is a pure Heaven of chrysolite:  
It is a world of immortal splendours.  
Then did he say unto me:  
When thou shalt have come into the Seventh Heaven  There shalt thou know that there is nothing hidden  From the Thrones and the Celestial Messengers.  Then he uplifted me upward still  
Until we stood in the fourth Heaven of the sphere;  It was far above the third Heaven,  
As the first was far above the earth.  
There also I saw divine ones  
Upon the right and left of the Throne;  

They sang, they glorified the Invisible Presence  Who veiled the Throne in glory.  
After that he uplifted me into the fifth Heaven,  The Angels were more beautiful than all the others,  But the Splendour on the Throne exceeded that of the  Angels,  
As much as they exceeded mere men.  
Then did I glorify Him who hath no name,  
The Almighty in the high Heavens,  
Who transmits His Glory from Heaven to Heaven,  Clothing His angels in splendour.  
Then he raised me into the sixth Heaven,  
Where I saw an ether brightest of all;  
The radiance that was in the Heaven I had last seen  Was night compared with this.  
Here the angels shine with lustre;  
A holy Splendour and a Throne also was here;  I said unto the Angel who conducted me,  
What is this which I behold, my Lord?  
He answered and said, I am not thy Lord,  
I am a Spirit like thyself,  
Appointed to conduct thee unto these places,  That thou mightest behold the Majesty of the King.  For beyond this place lives He who is never named,  With His Spirit, whose name is unrevealed;  With His Messenger who goeth forth,  
And of whom the Universe knoweth not.  
God alone is thy Lord,  
His Voice, the Heavens, the Powers do obey;  Thou shalt see Him visibly before thee,  
In the midst of His Heavens and His Thrones.  When from the mortal body which thou bearest  
 
Thou shalt ascend in spirit before Him,  
Then shalt thou assume bright raiment;  
Then shalt thou be like the Messengers.  
And I glorified God there, with his Spirits;  
Amid a radiant atmosphere of splendours:  
Yea, even the brilliancy of the five Heavens  Was as darkness to the brilliancy of this.  
Then he raised me unto the Seventh Heaven (13),  And I heard a Voice which froze my soul:  
Whither would the dweller among strangers ascend?  And I feared and trembled greatly.  
And while I trembled, lo! another mighty Voice;  It said: It is permitted that he ascend;  
Then we went into the Seventh Heaven,  
Where I saw spirits in the paradise splendour.  There were all the Holy Ones of God,  
Spirits, unclothed in flesh.  
I viewed them in their celestial garments,  
Assembled in splendour and divineness.  
And while I was yet gazing upon them,  
One of the beautiful Spirits who was a-nigh  Came unto me and shewed me Books,  
But they were not as the books of men.  
And he opened the Books before me,  
And they contained writings, but unlike the writings of  earth.  
And he read the Institutes of Heavenly Truth,  And the records of holy things.  
Then I beheld One standing,  
Whose glory exceeded the glory of all the others;  And all the saints and spirits of the place  
Advanced towards this One reverent with awe.    
Then this One became changed, and appeared like a  Divine Being.  
And the angel said, Venerate!  
And I venerated, and beheld the type  
Of many wonderful things revealed.  
And while I venerated this Spirit,  
Behold, I saw another Glorious Being,  
More beautiful and divine than the first,  
Whose glory suffered no transfiguration.  
And all the Angels approached and worshipped,  And venerated not the first Spirit, when the Lord was  nigh.  
A Cloud of Radiance was interposed,  
Through which my dazzled eyes beheld:  
Had I seen the Lord of Brightness,  
My spirit itself had been consumed.  
Then on my face I fell, and worshipped,  
For this was as the Supreme.  
Seventy thousand Veils He wore,  
To hide the brightness of seventy thousand suns.  And lo, an Ocean of Light:  
And he said to me, Who is this  
That sitteth on the right of God?  
And I answered, Sir, thou knowest.  
Then he, This is the Beloved,  
This is the Holy Spirit,  
Who speaks in thee and in the Prophets,  
Queen of the Ocean of Light.  
But on the left a Spirit standing,  
Clothed as a Son of Thunders:  
And I said unto the Angel, Who is he?  
And he said, It is the MESSENGER.  

Then mine eyes were opened,  
And I beheld a most Mysterious Glory.  
Darkness from excess of Light  
Seized and drowned my understanding.  
And I heard the tongues of thousand thousands  Glorifying, venerating, and chaunting Him,  Whose presence was too bright for me to behold,  Whose effulgence had stricken me blind (14).  And the hymns ascend from the six Heavens  Into this the Seventh Heaven of the Most High;  And I knew then why they sang around the Thrones,  Whose Splendour was an invisible Mystery.  And the Angel said, This Messenger of God  Hath received great exaltation (15);  
He is clothed by the Holy Spirit,  
And proclaimed through the mouths of the Divine Ones.  And I heard a Voice of music  
Say unto this Messenger;  
Go, descend through all the Heavens,  
And through the firmament of spheres descend.  Assimilate thyself in appearance unto all  
Who abide in the Heavens and the Circles,  
And go down upon earth,  
And free it from the fetters of darkness.  
Thus the Voice spake.  
And immediately we descended into the sixth Heaven,  And to the fifth, and to the fourth, and to all the  others,  
And so downwards through a multitude of Circles.  But whithersoever we came, the dwellers in the place  Recognized not the Messenger of God;  
They believed him to be as one with themselves (16),  
For he assumed the forms that belong to the various  spheres;  
And he passed into the Elemental Circles,  
And into the firmament, and so upon earth;  
And he took the appearance of a Man upon him,  And was believed by men to be one of themselves.  And he lived upon earth, and announced the Message;  And he passed away from earth, and ascended;  And the Spirits of the Firmaments and the Elemental  Circles  
Saw him pass, but with unchanged aspect.  
And they venerated him, saying:—  
How hath he descended, and we saw him not?  And how hath he passed, and we discovered not the  splendour  
Wherewith the Lord had clothed him?  
And he ascended through the innumerable Spheres,  And through the various Heavens of Paradise;  And they wondered, saying, How hath he descended?  And how knew we not the Messenger of Heaven?  And when he ascended into the Seventh Heaven,  He came unto the Great Glory,  
And of the Holy Spirit was received with gladness,  For he had done the message of the Most High.  And to me the Angel said, Great are these things  Which now have been made manifest to thee.  Thou hast seen and known secrets  
Which have been kept from the children of men.  Return unto thy mortal place  
Until the days of thy journey are accomplished.  Then shalt thou return hither,  
Worthily performing thy sacred purpose.  
